**
*

*
*

*

HARRY POTTER AND THE

METHODS OF
RATIONALITY
by LessWrong

*

1

*

chapters 1–83

Based on the characters of

J. K. ROWLING
and her books:
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone
Year One at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets
Year Two at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban
Year Three at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
Year Four at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
Year Five at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
Year Six at Hogwarts
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows
Year Seven at Hogwarts

HARRY POTTER
AND THE METHODS OF RATIONALIT Y

BY

LESS WRONG
Edited by some random fan of a fan

Find the original text (perhaps with added chapters) at:
http://www.fanfiction.net/s/5782108

CONTENTS
ONE
A Day of Very Low Probability — 13
TWO
Everything I Believe Is False — 21
THREE
Comparing Reality to Its Alternatives — 27
FOUR
The Eﬃcient Market Hypothesis — 33
FI V E
The Fundamental Attribution Error — 39
SIX
The Planning Fallacy — 49
SE V EN
Reciprocation — 79
EIGHT
Positive Bias — 111
NINE
Self Awareness, part i — 129
TEN
Self Awareness, part ii — 137
ELE V EN
Omake Files, parts i & ii — 149

TWELV E
Impulse Control — 157
THIRTEEN
Asking the Wrong Questions — 169
FOURTEEN
The Unknown and the Unknowable — 191
FIFTEEN
Conscientiousness — 207
SIXTEEN
Lateral Thinking — 219
SE V ENTEEN
Locating the Hypothesis — 239
EIGHTEEN
Dominance Hierarchies — 277
NINETEEN
Delayed Gratiﬁcation — 305
TWENT Y
Bayes’s Theorem — 329
TWENT Y-ONE
Rationalization — 347
TWENT Y-TWO
The Scientiﬁc Method — 367
TWENT Y-THREE
Belief in Belief — 393
TWENT Y-FOUR
Machiavellian Intelligence Hypothesis — 413
TWENT Y-FI V E
Hold Oﬀ on Proposing Solutions — 427

TWENT Y-SIX
Noticing Confusion — 445
TWENT Y-SE V EN
Empathy — 465
TWENT Y-EIGHT
Reductionism — 495
TWENT Y-NINE
Egocentric Bias — 519
THIRT Y
Working in Groups, part i — 537
THIRT Y-ONE
Working in Groups, part ii — 561
THIRT Y-TWO
Interlude: Personal Financial Management — 565
THIRT Y-THREE
Coordination Problems, part i — 571
THIRT Y-FOUR
Coordination Problems, part ii — 603
THIRT Y-FI V E
Coordination Problems, part iii — 617
THIRT Y-SIX
Status Diﬀerentials — 631
THIRT Y-SE V EN
Interlude: Crossing the Boundary — 645
THIRT Y-EIGHT
The Cardinal Sin — 649
THIRT Y-NINE
Pretending to be Wise, part i — 659

FORT Y
Pretending to be Wise, part ii — 683
FORT Y-ONE
Interlude: Frontal Override — 689
FORT Y-TWO
Courage — 697
FORT Y-THREE
Humanism, part i — 707
FORT Y-FOUR
Humanism, part ii — 729
FORT Y-FI V E
Humanism, part iii — 735
FORT Y-SIX
Humanism, part iv — 747
FORT Y-SE V EN
Personhood Theory — 761
FORT Y-EIGHT
Utilitarian Priorities — 795
FORT Y-NINE
Prior Information — 805
FIFT Y
Self Centeredness — 819
FIFT Y-ONE
Title Redacted, part i — 831
FIFT Y-TWO
The Stanford Prison Experiment, part ii — 841
FIFT Y-THREE
The Stanford Prison Experiment, part iii — 853

FIFT Y-FOUR
The Stanford Prison Experiment, part iv — 857
FIFT Y-FI V E
The Stanford Prison Experiment, part v — 875
FIFT Y-SIX
tspe, part vi: Constrained Optimization — 895
FIFT Y-SE V EN
tspe, part vii: Constrained Cognition — 907
FIFT Y-EIGHT
tspe, part viii: Constrained Cognition — 921
FIFT Y-NINE
tspe, part ix: Curiosity — 935
SIXT Y
The Stanford Prison Experiment, part x — 951
SIXT Y-ONE
tspe, part xi: Secrecy and Openness — 963
SIXT Y-TWO
The Stanford Prison Experiment, part xii — 981
SIXT Y-THREE
tspe, part xiii: Aftermaths — 997
SIXT Y-FOUR
Omake Files, part iii — 1041
SIXT Y-FI V E
Contagious Lies — 1051
SIXT Y-SIX
Self-Actualization, part i — 1065
SIXT Y-SE V EN
Self-Actualization, part ii — 1071

SIXT Y-EIGHT
Self-Actualization, part iii — 1083
SIXT Y-NINE
Self-Actualization, part iv — 1097
SE V ENT Y
Self-Actualization, part v — 1109
SE V ENT Y-ONE
Self-Actualization, part vi — 1125
SE V ENT Y-TWO
sa, part vii: Plausible Deniability — 1141
SE V ENT Y-THREE
sa, part viii: The Sacred and the Mundane — 1167
SE V ENT Y-FOUR
sa, part ix: Escalation of Conﬂicts — 1183
SE V ENT Y-FI V E
Self-Actualization, Finale: Responsibility — 1213
SE V ENT Y-SIX
Interlude with the Confessor: Sunk Costs — 1231
SE V ENT Y-SE V EN
Self-Actualization, Aftermaths: Surface Appearances — 1239
SE V ENT Y-EIGHT
Taboo Tradeoﬀs Prelude: Cheating — 1269
SE V ENT Y-NINE
Taboo Tradeoﬀs, part i — 1317
EIGHT Y
taboo tradeoffs, part ii: The Horns Eﬀect — 1341
EIGHT Y-ONE
Taboo Tradeoﬀs, part iii — 1359

**
*

CONTENTS

EIGHT Y-TWO
Taboo Tradeoﬀs, Final — 1375
EIGHT Y-THREE
Taboo Tradeoﬀs, Aftermath I — 1387

*

10

*

*
*

*

“[...A] terriﬁc series, subtle and dramatic and
stimulating.”
David Brin

“Oh Thoth Trismegistus, oh Ma’at, oh Ganesha, oh sweet lady Eris… I have not laughed so
hard in years!”
Eric S. Raymond

CHAPTER

ONE

A DAY OF V ERY LOW
PROBABILIT Y
Beneath the moonlight glints a tiny fragment of silver, a fraction of a line...
(black robes, falling)
...blood spills out in liters, and someone screams a word.

**
*
very inch of wall space is covered by a bookcase. Each bookcase
has six shelves, going almost to the ceiling. Some bookshelves are
stacked to the brim with hardcover books: science, mathematics, history, and everything else. Other shelves have two layers of paperback
science ﬁction, with the back layer of books propped up on old tissue
boxes or two-by-fours, so that you can see the back layer of books above
the books in front. And it still isn’t enough. Books are overﬂowing onto
the tables and the sofas and making little heaps under the windows.
This is the living-room of the house occupied by the eminent Professor Michael Verres-Evans, and his wife, Mrs. Petunia Evans-Verres, and
their adopted son, Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres.
There is a letter lying on the living-room table, and an unstamped
envelope of yellowish parchment, addressed to Mr. H. Potter in emeraldgreen ink.
The Professor and his wife are speaking sharply at each other, but
they are not shouting. The Professor considers shouting to be uncivilized.

E

*

13

*

**
*

CHAPTER ONE

*
*

*

“You’re joking,” Michael said to Petunia. His tone indicated that he
was very much afraid that she was serious.
“My sister was a witch,” Petunia repeated. She looked frightened,
but stood her ground. “Her husband was a wizard.”
“This is absurd!” Michael said sharply. “They were at our wedding—
they visited for Christmas—”
“I told them you weren’t to know,” Petunia whispered. “But it’s true.
I’ve seen things—”
The Professor rolled his eyes. “Dear, I understand that you’re not
familiar with the skeptical literature. You may not realize how easy it
is for a trained magician to fake the seemingly impossible. Remember
how I taught Harry to bend spoons? If it seemed like they could always
guess what you were thinking, that’s called cold reading—”
“It wasn’t bending spoons—”
“What was it, then?”
Petunia bit her lip. “I can’t just tell you. You’ll think I’m—” She
swallowed. “Listen. Michael. I wasn’t—always like this—” She gestured
at herself, as though to indicate her lithe form. “Lily did this. Because
I—because I begged her. For years, I begged her. Lily had always been
prettier than me, and I’d... been mean to her, because of that, and then
she got magic, can you imagine how I felt? And I begged her to use some
of that magic on me so that I could be pretty too, even if I couldn’t have
her magic, at least I could be pretty.”
Tears were gathering in Petunia’s eyes.
“And Lily would tell me no, and make up the most ridiculous excuses, like the world would end if she were nice to her sister, or a centaur
told her not to—the most ridiculous things, and I hated her for it. And
when I had just graduated, I was going out with this boy, Vernon Dursley, he was fat and he was the only boy who would talk to me in college.
And he said he wanted children, and that his ﬁrst son would be named
Dudley. And I thought to myself, what kind of parent names their child
Dudley Dursley? It was like I saw my whole future life stretching out in
front of me, and I couldn’t stand it. And I wrote to my sister and told
her that if she didn’t help me I’d rather just—”
Petunia stopped.
*

14

*

**
*

A DAY OF V ERY LOW PROBABILIT Y

*
*

*

“Anyway,” Petunia said, her voice small, “she gave in. She told me it
was dangerous, and I said I didn’t care any more, and I drank this potion
and I was sick for weeks, but when I got better my skin cleared up and I
ﬁnally ﬁlled out and... I was beautiful, people were nice to me,” her voice
broke, “and after that I couldn’t hate my sister any more, especially when
I learned what her magic brought her in the end—”
“Darling,” Michael said gently, “you got sick, you gained some
weight while resting in bed, and your skin cleared up on its own. Or
being sick made you change your diet—”
“She was a witch,” Petunia repeated. “I saw it.”
“Petunia,” Michael said. The annoyance was creeping into his voice.
“You know that can’t be true. Do I really have to explain why?”
Petunia wrung her hands. She seemed to be on the verge of tears.
“My love, I know I can’t win arguments with you, but please, you have
to trust me on this—”
“Dad! Mum!”
The two of them stopped and looked at Harry as though they’d forgotten there was a third person in the room.
Harry took a deep breath. “Mum, your parents didn’t have magic,
did they?”
“No,” Petunia said, looking puzzled.
“Then no one in your family knew about magic when Lily got her
letter. How did they get convinced?”
“Ah...” Petunia said. “They didn’t just send a letter. They sent a
professor from Hogwarts. He—” Petunia’s eyes ﬂicked to Michael. “He
showed us some magic.”
“Then you don’t have to ﬁght over this,” Harry said ﬁrmly. Hoping
against hope that this time, just this once, they would listen to him. “If
it’s true, we can just get a Hogwarts professor here and see the magic for
ourselves, and Dad will admit that it’s true. And if not, then Mum will
admit that it’s false. That’s what the experimental method is for, so that
we don’t have to resolve things just by arguing.”
The Professor turned and looked down at him, dismissive as usual.
“Oh, come now, Harry. Really, magic? I thought you’d know better
than to take this seriously, son, even if you’re only ten. Magic is just
*

15

*

**
*

CHAPTER ONE

*
*

*

about the most unscientiﬁc thing there is!”
Harry’s mouth twisted bitterly. He was treated well, probably better than most genetic fathers treated their own children. Harry had been
sent to the best elementary schools—and when that didn’t work out, he
was provided with tutors from the endless labor pool of starving students. Always Harry had been encouraged to study whatever caught his
attention, bought all the books that caught his fancy, sponsored in whatever math or science competitions he entered. He was given anything
reasonable that he wanted, except, maybe, the slightest shred of respect.
A tenured Professor who taught biochemistry at Oxford could hardly
be expected to listen to the advice of a little boy. You would listen to
Show Interest, of course; that’s what a Good Parent would do, and so, if
you conceived of yourself as a Good Parent, you would do it. But take
a ten-year-old seriously? Hardly.
Sometimes Harry wanted to scream at his father.
“Mum,” Harry said. “If you want to win this argument with Dad,
look in chapter two of the ﬁrst book of the Feynman Lectures on
Physics. There’s a quote there about how philosophers say a great deal
about what science absolutely requires, and it is all wrong, because the
only rule in science is that the ﬁnal arbiter is observation—that you just
have to look at the world and report what you see. Um... I can’t think
oﬀhand of where to ﬁnd something about how it’s an ideal of science
to settle things by experiment instead of arguments—”
His mother looked down at him and smiled. “Thank you, Harry.
But—” her head rose back up to stare at her husband. “I don’t want to
win an argument with your father. I want my husband to, to listen to
his wife who loves him, and trust her just this once—”
Harry closed his eyes brieﬂy. Hopeless. Both of his parents were just
hopeless.
Now his parents were getting into one of those arguments again, one
where his mother tried to make his father feel guilty, and his father tried
to make his mother feel stupid.
“I’m going to go to my room,” Harry announced. His voice trembled a little. “Please try not to ﬁght too much about this, Mum, Dad,
we’ll know soon enough how it comes out, right?”
*

16

*

**
*

A DAY OF V ERY LOW PROBABILIT Y

*
*

*

“Of course, Harry,” said his father, and his mother gave him a reassuring kiss, and then they went on ﬁghting while Harry climbed the
stairs to his bedroom.
He shut the door behind him and tried to think.
The funny thing was, he ought to have agreed with Dad. No one
had ever seen any evidence of magic, and according to Mum, there was a
whole magical world out there. How could anyone keep something like
that a secret? More magic? That seemed like a rather suspicious sort of
excuse.
It ought to have been an open-and-shut case for Mum joking, lying
or being insane, in ascending order of awfulness. If Mum had sent the
letter herself, that would explain how it arrived at the letterbox without
a stamp. A little insanity was far, far less improbable than the universe
really working like that.
Except that some part of Harry was utterly convinced that magic
was real, and had been since the instant he saw the putative letter from
the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry.
Harry rubbed his forehead, grimacing. Don’t believe everything you
think, one of his books had said.
But this bizarre certainty... Harry was ﬁnding himself just expecting
that, yes, a Hogwarts professor would show up and wave a wand and
magic would come out. The strange certainty was making no eﬀort to
guard itself against falsiﬁcation—wasn’t making excuses in advance for
why there wouldn’t be a professor, or the professor would only be able
to bend spoons.
Where do you come from, strange little prediction? Harry directed the
thought at his brain. Why do I believe what I believe?
Usually Harry was pretty good at answering that question, but in
this particular case, he had no clue what his brain was thinking.
Harry gave a mental shrug to himself. A ﬂat metal plate on a door
aﬀords pushing, and a handle on a door aﬀords pulling, and the thing to
do with a testable hypothesis is to go test it.
He took a piece of lined paper from his desk, and started writing.
Dear Deputy Headmistress
*

17

*

**
*

CHAPTER ONE

*
*

*

Harry paused, reﬂecting; then discarded the paper for another, tapping another millimeter of graphite from his mechanical pencil. This
called for careful calligraphy.
Dear Deputy Headmistress Minerva McGonagall,
Or Whomsoever It May Concern:
I recently received your letter of acceptance to Hogwarts,
addressed to Mr. H. Potter. You may not be aware that my genetic
parents, James Potter and Lily Potter (formerly Lily Evans) are
dead. I was adopted by Lily’s sister, Petunia Evans-Verres, and her
husband, Michael Verres-Evans.
I am extremely interested in attending Hogwarts, conditional
on such a place actually existing. Only my mother Petunia says she
knows about magic, and she can’t use it herself. My father is highly
skeptical. I myself am uncertain. I also don’t know where to obtain
any of the books or equipment listed in your acceptance letter.
Mother mentioned that you sent a Hogwarts representative to
Lily Potter (then Lily Evans) in order to demonstrate to her family
that magic was real, and, I presume, help Lily obtain her school materials. If you could do this for my own family it would be extremely
helpful.
Sincerely,
Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres.
Harry added their current address, then folded up the letter and put it
in an envelope, which he addressed to Hogwarts. Further consideration
led him to obtain a candle and drip wax onto the ﬂap of the envelope,
into which, using a penknife’s tip, he impressed the initials H.J.P.E.V. If
he was going to descend into this madness, he was going to do it with
style.
Then he opened his door and went back downstairs. His father was
sitting in the living-room and reading a book of higher math to show
how smart he was; and his mother was in the kitchen preparing one of
his father’s favorite dishes to show how loving she was. It didn’t look
*

18

*

**
*

A DAY OF V ERY LOW PROBABILIT Y

*
*

*

like they were talking to one another at all. As scary as arguments could
be, not arguing was somehow much worse.
“Mum,” Harry said into the unnerving silence, “I’m going to test
the hypothesis. According to your theory, how do I send an owl to
Hogwarts?”
His mother turned from the kitchen sink to stare at him, looking
shocked. “I—I don’t know, I think you just have to own a magic owl.”
That should’ve sounded highly suspicious, oh, so there’s no way to test
your theory then, but the peculiar certainty in Harry seemed willing to
stick its neck out even further.
“Well, the letter got here somehow,” Harry said, “so I’ll just wave it
around outside and call ‘letter for Hogwarts!’ and see if an owl picks it
up. Dad, do you want to come watch?”
His father shook his head minutely and kept on reading. Of course,
Harry thought to himself. Magic was a disgraceful thing that only stupid
people believed in; if his father went so far as to test the hypothesis, or
even watch it being tested, that would feel like associating himself with
that...
Only as Harry stumped out the back door, into the backyard, did it
occur to him that if an owl did come down and snatch the letter, he was
going to have some trouble telling Dad about it.
But—well—that can’t really happen, can it? No matter what my brain
seems to believe. If an owl really comes down and grabs this envelope, I’m
going to have worries a lot more important than what Dad thinks.
Harry took a deep breath, and raised the envelope into the air.
He swallowed.
Calling out Letter for Hogwarts! while holding an envelope high in
the air in the middle of your own backyard was... actually pretty embarrassing, now that he thought about it.
No. I’m better than Dad. I will use the scientiﬁc method even if it makes
me feel stupid.
“Letter—” Harry said, but it actually came out as more of a whispered
croak.
Harry steeled his will, and shouted into the empty sky, “Letter for
Hogwarts! Can I get an owl here?”
*

19

*

**
*

CHAPTER ONE

*
*

*

“Harry?” asked a bemused woman’s voice, one of the neighbors.
Harry pulled down his hand like it was on ﬁre and hid the envelope
behind his back like it was drug money. His whole face was hot with
shame.
An old woman’s face peered out from above the neighboring fence,
grizzled grey hair escaping from her hairnet. Mrs. Figg, the occasional
babysitter. “What are you doing, Harry?”
“Nothing,” Harry said in a strangled voice. “Just—testing a really
silly theory—”
“Did you get your acceptance letter from Hogwarts?”
Harry froze in place.
“Yes,” Harry’s lips said a little while later. “I got a letter from Hogwarts. They say they want my owl by July 31st, but—”
“But you don’t have an owl. Poor dear! I can’t imagine what someone
must have been thinking, sending you just the standard letter.”
A wrinkled arm stretched out over the fence, and opened an expectant hand. Hardly even thinking at this point, Harry gave over his envelope.
“Just leave it to me, dear,” said Mrs. Figg, “and in a jiﬀy or two I’ll
have someone over.”
And her face disappeared from over the fence.
There was a long silence in the backyard.
Then a boy’s voice said, calmly and quietly, “What.”

*

20

*

CHAPTER

TWO

E V ERYTHING I BELIE V E
IS FALSE
“Of course it was my fault. There’s no one else here who could be responsible for anything.”

**
*
ow, just to be clear,” Harry said, “if the professor does levitate
you, Dad, when you know you haven’t been attached to any
wires, that’s going to be suﬃcient evidence. You’re not going to turn
around and say that it’s a magician’s trick. That wouldn’t be fair play.
If you feel that way, you should say so now, and we can ﬁgure out a
diﬀerent experiment instead.”
Harry’s father, Professor Michael Verres-Evans, rolled his eyes. “Yes,
Harry.”
“And you, Mum, your theory says that the professor should be able
to do this, and if that doesn’t happen, you’ll admit you’re mistaken.
Nothing about how magic doesn’t work when people are skeptical of it,
or anything like that.”
Deputy Headmistress Minerva McGonagall was watching Harry
with a bemused expression. She looked quite witchy in her black robes
and pointed hat, but when she spoke she sounded formal and Scottish,
which didn’t go together with the look at all. At ﬁrst glance she looked
like someone who ought to cackle and put babies into cauldrons, but

“N

*

21

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWO

*
*

*

the whole eﬀect was ruined as soon as she opened her mouth. “Is that
suﬃcient, Mr. Potter?” she said. “Shall I go ahead and demonstrate?”
“Suﬃcient? Probably not,” Harry said. “But at least it will help. Go
ahead, Deputy Headmistress.”
“Just Professor will do,” said she, and then, “Wingardium Leviosa.”
Harry looked at his father.
“Huh,” Harry said.
His father looked back at him. “Huh,” his father echoed.
Then Professor Verres-Evans looked back at Professor McGonagall.
“All right, you can put me down now.”
His father was lowered carefully to the ground.
Harry ruﬄed a hand through his own hair. Maybe it was just that
strange part of him which had already been convinced, but... “That’s a
bit of an anticlimax,” Harry said. “You’d think there’d be some kind of
more dramatic mental event associated with updating on an observation
of inﬁnitesimal probability—” Harry stopped himself. Mum, McGonagall, and even his Dad were giving him that look again. “I mean, with
ﬁnding out that everything I believe is false.”
Seriously, it should have been more dramatic. His brain ought to
have been ﬂushing its entire current stock of hypotheses about the universe, none of which allowed this to happen. But instead his brain just
seemed to be going, All right, I saw the Hogwarts professor wave her wand
and make your father rise into the air, now what?
The witch-lady was smiling upon them and looking quite amused.
“Would you like a further demonstration, Mr. Potter?”
“You don’t have to,” Harry said. “We’ve performed a deﬁnitive experiment. But...” Harry hesitated. He couldn’t help himself. Actually,
under the circumstances, he shouldn’t be helping himself. It was right
and proper to be curious. “What else can you do?”
Professor McGonagall turned into a cat.
Harry scrambled back unthinkingly, backpedaling so fast that he
tripped over a stray stack of books and landed hard on his bottom with
a thwack. His hands came down to catch himself without quite reaching
properly, and there was a warning twinge in his shoulder as the weight
came down unbraced.
*

22

*

**
*

E V ERYTHING I BELIE V E IS FALSE

*
*

*

At once the small tabby cat morphed back up into a robed woman.
“I’m sorry, Mr. Potter,” McGonagall said, sounding sincere, though her
lips were twitching toward a smile. “I should have warned you.”
Harry was breathing in short pants. His voice came out choked.
“You can’t do that!”
“It’s only a Transﬁguration,” said McGonagall. “An Animagus transformation, to be exact.”
“You turned into a cat! A small cat! You violated Conservation of
Energy! That’s not just an arbitrary rule, it’s implied by the form of
the quantum Hamiltonian! Rejecting it destroys unitarity and then you
get ftl signaling! And cats are complicated! A human mind can’t just
visualize a whole cat’s anatomy and, and all the cat biochemistry, and
what about the neurology? How can you go on thinking using a catsized brain?”
McGonagall’s lips were twitching harder now. “Magic.”
“Magic isn’t enough to do that! You’d have to be a god!”
McGonagall blinked. “That’s the ﬁrst time I’ve ever been called that.”
A blur was coming over Harry’s vision, as his brain started to comprehend what had just broken. The whole idea of a uniﬁed universe with
mathematically regular laws, that was what had been ﬂushed down the
toilet; the whole notion of physics. Three thousand years of resolving
big complicated things into smaller pieces, discovering that the music of
the planets was the same tune as a falling apple, ﬁnding that the true laws
were perfectly universal and had no exceptions anywhere and took the
form of simple math governing the smallest parts, not to mention that
the mind was the brain and the brain was made of neurons, a brain was
what a person was—
And then a woman turned into a cat, so much for all that.
A hundred questions fought for priority over Harry’s lips and the
winner poured out: “And, and what kind of incantation is Wingardium
Leviosa? Who invents the words to these spells, preschool children?”
“That will do, Mr. Potter,” McGonagall said crisply, though her eyes
shone with suppressed amusement. “If you wish to learn about magic, I
suggest that we ﬁnalize the paperwork so that you can attend Hogwarts.”
“Right,” Harry said, somewhat dazed. He pulled his thoughts to*

23

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWO

*
*

*

gether. The March of Reason would just have to start over, that was
all; they still had the experimental method and that was the important
thing. “How do I get to Hogwarts, then?”
A choked laugh escaped McGonagall, as if extracted from her by
tweezers.
“Hold on a moment, Harry,” his father said. “Remember why you
haven’t been attending school up until now? What about your condition?”
McGonagall spun to face Michael. “His condition? What’s this?”
“I don’t sleep right,” Harry said. He waved his hands helplessly. “My
sleep cycle is twenty-six hours long, I always go to sleep two hours later,
every day. I can’t fall asleep any earlier than that, and then the next day I
go to sleep two hours later than that. 10pm, 12am, 2am, 4am, until it goes
around the clock. Even if I try to wake up early, it makes no diﬀerence
and I’m a wreck that whole day. That’s why I haven’t been attending a
regular school up until now.”
“One of the reasons,” said his mother. Harry shot her a glare.
McGonagall gave a long hmmmmm. “I can’t recall hearing about
such a condition before...” she said slowly. “I’ll check with Madam Pomfrey to see if she knows any remedies.” Then her face brightened. “No,
I’m sure this won’t be a problem—I’ll ﬁnd a solution one way or another.
Now,” and her gaze sharpened again, “what are these other reasons?”
Harry sent his parents a glare. “I am a conscientious objector to the
child draft, on the grounds that I should not have to suﬀer for a continually disintegrating school system’s abject failure to provide teachers or
study materials of even minimally adequate quality.”
Both of Harry’s parents howled with laughter at that, like they
thought it was all a big joke. “Oh,” said Harry’s father, eyes bright, “is
that why you bit a math teacher in third year.”
“She didn’t know what a logarithm was!”
“Of course,” seconded Harry’s mother. “Biting her was a very mature response to that.”
Harry’s father nodded. “A well-considered policy for solving the
general problem of teachers who don’t understand logarithms.”
“I was seven years old! How long are you going to keep on bringing
*

24

*

**
*

E V ERYTHING I BELIE V E IS FALSE

*
*

*

that up?”
“I know,” said his mother sympathetically, “you bite one math
teacher and they never let you forget it, do they?”
Harry turned to McGonagall. “There! You see what I have to deal
with?”
“Excuse me,” said Petunia, and ﬂed through the screen door onto the
outside porch, from which her screams of laughter were quite clearly
audible.
“There, ah, there,” McGonagall seemed to be having trouble speaking for some reason, “there is to be no biting of teachers at Hogwarts, is
that very clear, Mr. Potter?”
Harry scowled at her. “Fine, I won’t bite anyone who doesn’t bite
me ﬁrst.”
Professor Michael Verres-Evans also had to leave the room brieﬂy
upon hearing that.
“Well,” McGonagall sighed, after Harry’s parents had composed
themselves and returned. “Well. I think, under the circumstances, that
I should avoid taking you to purchase your study materials until a day
or two before school begins.”
“What? Why? The other children already know magic, don’t they?
I have to start catching up right away!”
“Rest assured, Mr. Potter,” replied Professor McGonagall,
“Hogwarts is quite capable of teaching the basics. And I suspect,
Mr. Potter, that if I leave you alone for two months with your
schoolbooks, even without a wand, I will return to this house only to
ﬁnd a crater billowing purple smoke, a depopulated city surrounding it
and a plague of ﬂaming zebras terrorizing what remains of England.”
Harry’s mother and father nodded in perfect unison.
“Mum! Dad!”

*

25

*

CHAPTER

THREE

COMPARING REALIT Y
TO ITS ALTERNATI V ES
“I do not have time for this.”

**
*
ood Lord,” said the bartender, peering at Harry, “is this—can this
be—?”
Harry leaned forward toward the bar of the Leaky Cauldron as best
he could, though it came up to somewhere around the tips of his eyebrows. A question like that deserved his very best.
“Am I—could I be—maybe—you never know—if it is—but the question remains—why?”
“Bless my soul,” whispered the old bartender, “Harry Potter... what
an honor.”
Harry blinked, then rallied. “Well, yes, you’re very perceptive; most
people don’t realize that quite so quickly—”
“That’s enough,” Professor McGonagall said. Her hand tightened on
Harry’s shoulder. “Don’t pester the boy, Tom, he’s new to all this.”
“But it is him?” quavered an old woman. “It’s Harry Potter?” With
a scraping sound, she got up from her chair.
“Doris—” McGonagall said warningly. The glare she shot around the
room should have been enough to intimidate anyone.

“G

*

27

*

**
*

CHAPTER THREE

*
*

*

“I only want to shake his hand,” the woman whispered. She bent
low and stuck out a wrinkled hand, which Harry, feeling confused and
more uncomfortable than he ever had in his life, carefully shook. Tears
fell from the woman’s eyes onto their clasped hands. “My granson was
an Auror,” she whispered to him. “Died in seventy-nine. Thank you,
Harry Potter. Thank heavens for you.”
“You’re welcome,” Harry said, entirely on automatic, and then
turned his head and shot McGonagall a terriﬁed, pleading look.
McGonagall slammed her foot down just as the general rush was
about to start. It made a noise that gave Harry a new referent for the
phrase “Crack of Doom”, and everyone froze in place.
“We’re in a hurry,” said McGonagall in a voice that sounded perfectly, utterly normal.
They left the bar without any trouble.
“McGonagall?” Harry said, once they were in the courtyard. He
had meant to ask what was going on, but oddly found himself asking an
entirely diﬀerent question instead. “Who was the pale man? The man
in the bar with the twitching eye?”
“Hm?” McGonagall said, sounding a bit surprised; perhaps she
hadn’t expected that question either. “That was Professor Quirrell.
He’ll be teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts this year at
Hogwarts.”
“I had the strangest feeling that I knew him...” Harry rubbed his
forehead. “And that I shouldn’t ought to shake his hand.” Like someone
he’d known a long time ago, and then been separated from... an unhappy
feeling, a sense of loss. “And the rest of it?”
McGonagall gave him an odd glance. “Mr. Potter... do you know...
how much have you been told... about how your parents died?”
Harry returned a steady look. “My parents are alive and well, and
they always refused to talk to me about how my genetic parents died.
From which I infer that it wasn’t good.”
“An admirable loyalty,” said McGonagall. Her voice went low.
“Though it hurts a little to hear you say it like that. Lily and James
were friends of mine.”
Harry looked away, suddenly ashamed. “I’m sorry,” he said in a
*

28

*

**
*

COMPARING REALIT Y
TO ITS ALTERNATIV ES

*
*

*

small voice. “But I have a Mum and Dad. And I know that I’d just make
myself unhappy by comparing that reality to... something perfect that I
built up in my imagination.”
“That is amazingly wise of you,” McGonagall said quietly. “But your
genetic parents died very well indeed, protecting you.”
Protecting me?
Something strange clutched at Harry’s heart. “What... did happen?”
McGonagall sighed. Her wand tapped Harry’s forehead, and his vision blurred for a moment. “Something of a disguise,” McGonagall said,
“so that this doesn’t happen again, not until you’re ready.” Then her
wand licked out again, and tapped three times on a brick wall...
...which hollowed into a hole, and dilated and expanded and shivered
into a huge archway, revealing a long row of shops with signs advertising
cauldrons and dragon livers.
Harry didn’t blink. It wasn’t like anyone was turning into a cat.
And they walked forward, together, into the wizarding world.
There were merchants hawking Bounce Boots (“Made with real Flubber!”) and “Knives +3! Forks +2! Spoons with a +4 bonus!” There were
goggles that would turn anything you looked at green, and a lineup of
cushy lounge chairs with ejection seats for emergencies.
Harry’s head kept rotating, rotating like it was trying to screw itself
oﬀ his neck. It was like walking through the magical items section of an
Advanced Dungeons and Dragons rulebook (he didn’t play the game, but
he did enjoy reading the rulebooks). Harry desperately didn’t want to
miss a single item for sale, in case it was one of the three you needed to
complete the cycle of inﬁnite wish spells.
Then Harry spotted something that made him, entirely without
thinking, veer oﬀ from McGonagall and start heading straight into the
store, a front of blue bricks with bronze-metal trim. He was brought
back to reality only when McGonagall stepped right in front of him.
“Mr. Potter?” she said.
Harry blinked, then realized what he’d just done. “I’m sorry! I
forgot for a moment that I was with you instead of my family.” Harry
gestured at the store window, which displayed ﬁery letters that shone
piercingly bright and yet remote, spelling out Bigbam’s Brilliant Books.
*

29

*

**
*

CHAPTER THREE

*
*

*

“When you walk past a bookstore you haven’t visited before, you have
to go in and look around. That’s the family rule.”
“That is the most Ravenclaw thing I have ever heard.”
“What?”
“Nothing. Mr. Potter, our ﬁrst step is to visit Gringotts, the bank of
the wizarding world. Your genetic family vault is there, with the inheritance your genetic parents left you, and you’ll need money for school
supplies.” She sighed. “And, I suppose, a certain amount of spending
money for books could be excused as well. Though you might want to
hold oﬀ for a time. Hogwarts has quite a large library on magical subjects. And the tower in which, I strongly suspect, you will be living, has
a more broad-ranging library of its own. Any book you bought now
would probably be a duplicate.”
Harry nodded, and they walked on.
“Don’t get me wrong, it’s a great distraction,” Harry said as his head
kept swiveling, “probably the best distraction anyone has ever tried on
me, but don’t think I’ve forgotten about our pending discussion.”
McGonagall sighed. “Your parents—or your mother at any rate—
may have been very wise not to tell you.”
“So you wish that I could continue in blissful ignorance? There is a
certain ﬂaw in that plan, Professor McGonagall.”
“I suppose it would be rather pointless,” the witch said tightly, “when
anyone on the street could tell you the story. Very well.”
And she told him of He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named, the Dark Lord,
Voldemort.
“Voldemort?” Harry whispered. It should have been funny, but it
wasn’t. The name burned with a cold feeling, ruthlessness, diamond
clarity, a hammer of pure titanium descending upon an anvil of yielding
ﬂesh. A chill swept over Harry even as he pronounced the word, and he
resolved then and there to use safer terms like You-Know-Who.
The Dark Lord had raged upon wizarding Britain like a wilding wolf,
tearing and rending at the fabric of their everyday lives. Other countries
had wrung their hands but hesitated to intervene, whether out of apathetic selﬁshness or simple fear, for whichever was ﬁrst among them to
oppose the Dark Lord, their peace would be the next target of his terror.
*

30

*

**
*

COMPARING REALIT Y
TO ITS ALTERNATIV ES

*
*

*

(The bystander eﬀect, thought Harry, thinking of Latane and Darley’s
experiment which had shown that you were more likely to get help if you
had an epileptic ﬁt in front of one person than in front of three. Diﬀusion
of responsibility, everyone hoping that someone else would go ﬁrst.)
The Death Eaters had followed in the Dark Lord’s wake and in his
vanguard, carrion vultures to pick at wounds, or snakes to bite and
weaken. The Death Eaters were not as terrible as the Dark Lord, but
they were terrible, and they were many. And the Death Eaters wielded
more than wands; there was wealth within those masked ranks, and political power, and secrets held in blackmail, to paralyze a society trying
to protect itself.
An old and respected journalist, Yermy Wibble, called for increased
taxes and a draft. He shouted that it was absurd for the many to cower
in fear of the few. His skin, only his skin, had been found nailed to the
newsroom wall that next morning, next to the skins of his wife and two
daughters. Everyone wished for something more to be done, and no one
dared take the lead to propose it. Whoever stood out the most became
the next example.
Until the names of James and Lily Potter rose to the top of that list.
And those two might have died with their wands in their hands and
not regretted their choices, for they were heroes; but for that they had
an infant child, their son, Harry Potter.
Tears were coming into Harry’s eyes. He wiped them away in anger
or maybe desperation, I didn’t know those people, not really, they aren’t
my parents now, it would be pointless to feel so sad for them—
When Harry was done sobbing into McGonagall’s robes, he looked
up, and felt a little bit better to see tears in McGonagall’s eyes as well.
“So what happened?” Harry said, his voice trembling.
“The Dark Lord came to Godric’s Hollow,” said McGonagall in a
whisper. “You should have been hidden, but you were betrayed. The
Dark Lord killed James, and he killed Lily, and he came in the end to
you, to your crib. He cast the Killing Curse at you. And that was where
it ended. The Killing Curse is formed of pure hate, and strikes directly
at the soul, severing it from the body. It cannot be blocked. The only
defense is not to be there. But you survived. You are the only person
*

31

*

**
*

CHAPTER THREE

*
*

*

ever to survive. The Killing Curse reﬂected and rebounded and struck
the Dark Lord, leaving only the burnt hulk of his body and a scar on
your forehead. That was the end of the terror, and we were free. That,
Harry Potter, is why people want to see the scar on your forehead, and
why they want to shake your hand.”
The storm of weeping that had washed through Harry had used up
all his tears; he could not cry again, he was done.
(And somewhere in the back of his mind was a small, small note of
confusion, a sense of something wrong about that story; and it should
have been a part of Harry’s art to notice that tiny note, but he was distracted. For it is a sad rule that whenever you are most in need of your
art as a rationalist, that is when you are most likely to forget it.)
Harry detached himself from McGonagall’s side. “I’ll—have to think
about this,” he said, trying to keep his voice under control. He stared
at his shoes. “Um. You can go ahead and call them my parents, if you
want, you don’t have to say ‘genetic parents’ or anything. I guess there’s
no reason I can’t have two mothers and two fathers.”
There was no sound from McGonagall.
And they walked together in silence, until they came before a great
white building with vast bronze doors.
“Gringotts,” said McGonagall.

*

32

*

CHAPTER

FOUR

THE EFFICIENT MARKET
H YPOTHESIS
“World domination is such an ugly phrase. I prefer to call it world optimization.”

**
*
eaps of gold Galleons. Stacks of silver Sickles. Piles of bronze
Knuts.
Harry stood there, and stared with his mouth open at the family
vault. He had so many questions he didn’t know where to start.
From just outside the door of the vault, McGonagall watched him,
seeming to lean casually against the wall, but her eyes intent. Well, that
made sense. Being plopped in front of a giant heap of gold coins was a
test of character so pure it was archetypal.
“Are these coins the pure metal?” Harry said ﬁnally.
“What?” hissed the goblin Griphook, who was waiting near the door.
“Are you questioning the integrity of Gringotts, Mister Potter-EvansVerres?”
“No,” said Harry absently, “not at all, sorry if that came out wrong,
sir. I just have no idea at all how your ﬁnancial system works. I’m asking
if Galleons in general are made of pure gold.”
“Of course,” said Griphook.
“And can anyone coin them, or are they issued by a monopoly that
thereby collects seigniorage?”

H

*

33

*

**
*

CHAPTER FOUR

*
*

*

“What?” said McGonagall blankly.
Griphook grinned, showing very sharp teeth. “Only a fool would
trust any but goblin coin!”
“In other words,” Harry said, “the coins aren’t supposed to be worth
any more than the metal making them up?”
Griphook stared at Harry. McGonagall looked bemused.
“I mean, suppose I came in here with a ton of silver. Could I get a
ton of Sickles made from it?”
“For a fee, Mr. Potter-Evans-Verres.” The goblin watched him with
glittering eyes. “For a certain fee. Where would you ﬁnd a ton of silver,
I wonder?”
“I was speaking hypothetically,” Harry said. For now, at any rate.
“So... how much would you charge in fees, as a fraction of the whole
weight?”
Griphook’s eyes were intent. “I would have to consult my superiors...”
“Give me a wild guess. I won’t hold Gringotts to it.”
“A twentieth part of the metal would well pay for the coining.”
Harry nodded. “Thank you very much, Mr. Griphook.”
So not only is the wizarding economy almost completely decoupled from
the Muggle economy, no one here has ever heard of arbitrage. The larger
Muggle economy had a ﬂuctuating trading range of gold to silver, so every time the Muggle gold-to-silver ratio got more than 5% away from the
weight of seventeen Sickles to one Galleon, either gold or silver should
have drained from the wizarding economy until it became impossible
to maintain the exchange rate. Bring in a ton of silver, change to Sickles (and pay 5%), change the Sickles for Galleons, take the gold to the
Muggle world, exchange it for more silver than you started with, and
repeat.
Wasn’t the Muggle gold to silver ratio somewhere around ﬁfty to
one? Harry didn’t think it was seventeen, anyway. And it looked like
the silver coins were actually smaller than the gold coins.
Then again, Harry was standing in a bank that literally stored your
money in vaults full of gold coins guarded by dragons, where you had
to go in and take coins out of your vault whenever you wanted to spend
*

34

*

**
*

THE EFFICIENT MARKET H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

money. The ﬁner points of arbitraging away market ineﬃciencies might
well be lost on them. He’d been tempted to make some sort of snide
remark about the crudity of their ﬁnancial system...
But the sad thing is, their way is probably better.
On the other hand, one competent hedge fundie could probably own
the whole wizarding world within a week. Harry ﬁled away this notion
in case he ever ran out of money, or had a week free.
Meanwhile, the giant heaps of gold coins within the Potter vault
ought to suit his near-term requirements.
Harry stumped forward, and began picking up gold coins with one
hand and dumping them into the other.
When he had reached twenty, McGonagall coughed. “I think that
will be more than enough to pay for your school supplies, Mr. Potter.”
“Hm?” Harry said, his mind elsewhere. “Hold on, I’m doing a Fermi
calculation.”
“A what?” McGonagall said, sounding somewhat alarmed.
“It’s a math thing. Named after Enrico Fermi. A way of getting
rough numbers very quickly in your head...”
Twenty gold Galleons weighed a tenth of a kilogram, maybe? And
gold was, what, ten thousand British pounds a kilogram? So a Galleon
would be worth about ﬁfty British pounds... The heaps/stacks of gold
coins looked to be about sixty coins high and twenty coins wide in either
dimension of the base, and was pyramidal, so it would be around onethird of the cube. Eight thousand Galleons per heap, roughly, and there
were around ﬁve heaps of that size, so forty thousand Galleons or 2
million British pounds.
Not bad. Harry smiled with a certain grim satisfaction. It was too
bad that he was right in the middle of discovering the amazing new world
of magic, and couldn’t take time out to explore the amazing new world
of being rich, which a quick Fermi estimate said was roughly a billion
times less interesting.
Still, that’s the last time I ever mow a lawn for one lousy pound.
Harry wheeled from the giant heap of money. “Pardon me for asking, Professor McGonagall, but I understand that my parents were in
their twenties when they died. Is this a usual amount of money for a
*

35

*

**
*

CHAPTER FOUR

*
*

*

young couple to have in their vault, in the wizarding world?” If it was,
a cup of coﬀee probably cost ﬁve thousand pounds. Rule one of economics: you can’t eat money.
McGonagall shook her head. “Your father was the last heir of an old
family, Mr. Potter. It’s also possible...” McGonagall hesitated. “Some of
this money may be from bounties that had been placed on You-KnowWho, payable to his ki—” McGonagall swallowed the word. “To whoever might defeat him. Or those bounties might not have been collected
yet. I’m not sure.”
“Interesting...” Harry said slowly. “So some of this really is, in a
sense, mine. That is, earned by me. Sort of. Possibly. Even if I don’t
remember the occasion.” Harry’s ﬁngers tapped against his pants-leg.
“That makes me feel less guilty about spending a very tiny fraction of it!
Don’t panic, Professor McGonagall!”
“Mr. Potter! You are a minor, and as such, you will only be allowed
to make reasonable withdrawals from—”
“I am all about reasonable! I am totally on board with ﬁscal prudence
and impulse control! But I did see some things on the way here which
would constitute sensible, grown-up purchases...”
Harry locked gazes with McGonagall, engaging in a silent staring
contest.
“Like what?” McGonagall said ﬁnally.
“Trunks whose insides hold more than their outsides?”
McGonagall’s face grew stern. “Those are very expensive, Mr. Potter!”
“Yes, but—” Harry pleaded. “I’m sure that when I’m an adult I’ll
want one. And I can aﬀord one. It would make just as much sense to
buy it now instead of later, and get the use of it right away, wouldn’t it?
It’s the same money either way. I mean, I would want a good one, with
lots of room inside, good enough that I wouldn’t have to just get a better
one later...” Harry trailed oﬀ hopefully.
McGonagall’s gaze didn’t waver. “And just what would you keep in
a trunk like that, Mr. Potter—”
“Books.”
“Of course,” sighed McGonagall.
*

36

*

**
*

THE EFFICIENT MARKET H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

“You should have told me much earlier that sort of magic item existed! And that I could aﬀord one! Now my father and I are going to
have to spend the next two days frantically hitting up all the used bookstores for old textbooks, so I can have a decent math and science library
with me at Hogwarts—and maybe a mini sf&f collection, if I can assemble something decent out of the bargain bins. Or better yet, I’ll make
the deal a little sweeter for you, okay? Just let me buy—”
“Mr. Potter! You think you can bribe me?”
“What? No! Not like that! I’m saying, Hogwarts can keep some
of the books I bring, if you think that any of them would make good
additions to the library. I’m going to be getting them cheap, and I just
want to have them around somewhere or other. It’s okay to bribe people
with books, right? That’s a—”
“Family tradition.”
“Yes, exactly.”
McGonagall’s whole body seemed to slump. “I fear I cannot deny
the logic of your words, though I very much wish I could. I will allow
you to withdraw an additional hundred Galleons, Mr. Potter. I know
that I will regret this, and I am doing it anyway.”
“That’s the spirit! And does a ‘mokeskin pouch’ do what I think it
does?”
“It can’t do as much as a trunk,” McGonagall said reluctantly, “but
a mokeskin pouch with a Retrieval Charm and Undetectable Extension
Charm can hold a number of items until they are called forth by the one
who emplaced them.”
“Yes, I deﬁnitely need one of those too. It’s like the super beltpack
of ultimate awesomeness! Batman’s utility belt of holding! Never mind
a swiss army knife, you could just carry a whole tool set in there! Or
other magic items! Or books! I could have the top three books I was
reading on me at all times, and just pull one out anywhere! I’ll never
have to waste another minute of my life! What do you say, Professor
McGonagall? It’s in the best of all possible causes.”
“Fine. You may add another ten Galleons.”
Griphook was favoring Harry with a gaze of frank respect, possibly
even outright admiration.
*

37

*

**
*

CHAPTER FOUR

*
*

*

“And a little spending money, like you mentioned earlier. I think I
can remember seeing one or two other things I might want to store in
that pouch.”
“Don’t push it, Mr. Potter.”
“But oh, Professor McGonagall, why rain on my parade? Surely this
is a happy day, when I discover all things wizarding for the ﬁrst time!
Why act the part of the grumpy grownup when instead you could smile
and remember your own innocent childhood, watching the look of delight upon my young face as I buy a few toys using an insigniﬁcant fraction of the wealth that I earned by defeating the most terrible wizard
Britain has ever known, not that I’m accusing you of being ungrateful
or anything, but still, what are a few toys compared to that?”
“You,” McGonagall growled. There was a look on her face so fearsome and terrible that Harry squeaked and stepped back, knocking over
a whole pile of gold coins with a great jingling noise and sprawling backward into a heap of money. Griphook sighed and put a palm over his
face. “I would be doing a great service to wizarding Britain, Mr. Potter,
if I locked you in this vault and left you here.”
And they left without any more trouble.

*

38

*

CHAPTER

FI V E

THE FUNDAMENTAL
ATTRIBUTION ERROR
“He’s only eleven years old, Hermione.”
“So are you.”
“I don’t count.”

**
*
he Moke Shop was a quaint little shop (some might even say cute)
ensconced behind a vegetable stand that was behind a magical
glove store that was on a byway oﬀ a side street of Diagon Alley. The
shopkeeper, disappointingly, was not a wizened old mysterious man.
Just a nervous-looking young woman wearing fading yellow robes.
Right now she was holding out a Moke Super Pouch qx31, whose
selling point was that it had a widening lip as well as an Undetectable
Extension Charm: you could actually ﬁt big things in it, though the
total volume was still limited.
Harry had insisted on coming here straight away, ﬁrst thing—insisted
as hard as he thought he could without making McGonagall suspicious.
Harry had something he needed to put into the pouch as soon as possible. It wasn’t the bag of Galleons that McGonagall had allowed him
to withdraw from Gringotts. It was all the other Galleons that Harry
had surreptitiously shoved into his pocket after accidentally falling into
a heap of gold coins. That had been a real accident, but Harry was never
one to discard an opportunity... though it’d really been more of a spur-

T

*

39

*

**
*

CHAPTER FI V E

*
*

*

of-the-moment thing. Ever since Harry had been awkwardly carrying
the allowed bag of Galleons next to his pants pocket, so that any jingling
would seem to come from the right place.
This still left the question of how he was actually going to get the
other coins into the pouch without getting caught. The golden coins
might have been his, but they were still stolen—self-stolen? Auto
thieved?
Harry looked up from the Moke Super Pouch qx31 on the counter
in front of him. “Can I try this for a bit? To make sure it works, um,
reliably?” He widened his eyes in an expression of boyish, playful innocence.
Sure enough, after ten repetitions of putting the coin-bag into the
pouch, reaching in, whispering “bag of gold”, and taking it out, McGonagall took a step away and turned her head to look at some of the other
items in the shop, and the shopkeeper moved her eyes to watch.
Harry dropped the bag of gold into the mokeskin pouch with his
left hand; his right hand came out of his pocket tightly holding some
of the gold coins, reached into the mokeskin pouch, dropped the loose
Galleons, and (with a whisper of “bag of gold”) retrieved the original
bag. Then the bag went back into his left hand, to be dropped in again,
and Harry’s right hand went back into his pocket...
McGonagall looked back at him once, but Harry managed to avoid
freezing or ﬂinching, and she didn’t seem to notice anything. Though
you never did quite know, with the adults that had a sense of humor. It
took three iterations to get the job done, and Harry guessed he’d managed to steal maybe thirty Galleons from himself.
Harry reached up, wiped a bit of sweat from his forehead, and exhaled. “I’d like this one, please.”
Fifteen Galleons lighter (twice the price of a wizard’s wand, apparently) and one Moke Super Pouch qx31 heavier, Harry and McGonagall
pushed their way out of the door. The door formed a hand and waved
goodbye to them as they left, extruding its arm in a way that made Harry
feel a bit queasy.
And then, unfortunately...
“Are you really Harry Potter?” whispered the old man, one huge tear
*

40

*

**
*

THE FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTION ERROR

*
*

*

sliding down his cheek. “You wouldn’t lie about that, would you? Only
I’d heard rumors that you didn’t really survive the Killing Curse and
that’s why no one ever heard from you again.”
...it seemed that McGonagall’s disguise spell was less than perfectly
eﬀective against more experienced magical practitioners.
McGonagall had laid a hand on Harry’s shoulder and pulled him into
the nearest byway the moment she’d heard “Harry Potter?” The old man
had followed, but at least it looked like no one else had heard.
Harry considered the question. Was he really Harry Potter? “I only
know what other people have told me,” Harry said. “It’s not like I remember being born.” His hand brushed his forehead. “I’ve had this scar
as long as I remember, and I’ve been told my name was Harry Potter as
long as I remember. But,” Harry said thoughtfully, “if there’s already
suﬃcient cause to postulate a conspiracy, there’s no reason why they
wouldn’t just ﬁnd another wizarding orphan and raise him to believe
that he was Harry Potter—”
McGonagall drew her hand over her face in exasperation. “You look
just about exactly like your father, James, the year he ﬁrst attended Hogwarts, except that you have your mother Lily’s eyes. And I can attest on
the basis of personality alone that you are deﬁnitely related to the Scourge
of Gryﬃndor.”
“She could be in on it too,” Harry observed.
“No,” quavered the old man. “She’s right. You have your mother’s
eyes.”
“Hmm,” Harry frowned. “I suppose you could be in on it too—”
“Enough, Mr. Potter,” McGonagall said.
The old man raised up a hand as if to touch Harry, but then let it
fall. “I’m just glad that you’re alive,” he murmured. “Thank you, Harry
Potter. Thank you for what you did... I’ll leave you alone now.”
And his cane slowly tapped away, out the byway and down the main
street of Diagon Alley.
McGonagall looked around, her expression tense and grim. Harry
automatically looked around himself. But the byway seemed to be
empty of all but old leaves, and from the mouth leading out into
Diagon Alley there were only swiftly striding passersby to be seen.
*

41

*

**
*

CHAPTER FI V E

*
*

*

Finally McGonagall seemed to relax. “That was not well done,” she
said in a low voice. “I know you’re not used to this, Mr. Potter, but
people do care about you. Please be kind to them.”
Harry looked down at his shoes. “They shouldn’t,” he said with a
tinge of bitterness. “Care about me, I mean.”
“You saved them from You-Know-Who,” McGonagall said. “How
should they not care?”
Harry looked up at McGonagall and sighed. “I suppose there’s no
chance that if I said fundamental attribution error you’d have any idea
what that meant.”
McGonagall shook her head. “No, but please explain.”
“Well...” Harry said, trying to ﬁgure out how to describe that particular bit of Muggle science. “Suppose you come into work and see your
coworker kicking his desk. You think, ‘what an angry person he must
be’. Your coworker is thinking about how someone pushed him into a
wall on the way to work and then shouted at him. Anyone would be
angry at that, he thinks. When we look at others we see personality
traits that explain their behavior, but when we look at ourselves we see
circumstances that explain our behavior. People’s stories make internal sense to them, from the inside, but we don’t see people’s histories
trailing behind them in the air. We only see them in one situation, and
we don’t see what they would be like in a diﬀerent situation. So the
fundamental attribution error is that we explain by permanent, enduring traits what would be better explained by circumstance and context.”
There were some elegant experiments which conﬁrmed this, but Harry
wasn’t about to go into them.
McGonagall’s eyebrows drew up. “I think I understand...” she said
slowly. “But what does that have to do with you?”
Harry kicked the brick wall of the byway, hard enough to make his
foot hurt. “People think that I saved them from You-Know-Who because
I’m some kind of great warrior of the Light.”
“The one with the power to vanquish the Dark Lord...” murmured
McGonagall, an irony leavening her voice which Harry did not then
understand.
“Yes,” Harry said, annoyance and frustration warring in his voice,
*

42

*

**
*

THE FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTION ERROR

*
*

*

“like I destroyed the Dark Lord because I have some kind of permanent,
enduring destroy-the-Dark-Lord trait. I was ﬁfteen months old at the
time! I don’t know what happened, but I would guess it had something
to do with, as the saying goes, contingent environmental circumstances.
And certainly nothing to do with my personality. People don’t care
about me, they aren’t even paying attention to me, they want to shake
hands with a bad explanation.” Harry paused, and looked at McGonagall.
“Do you know what really happened?”
“I have formed a conjecture...” McGonagall said. “After meeting you,
that is.”
“Yes?”
“You triumphed over the Dark Lord by being more awful than he
was, and survived the Killing Curse by being more terrible than Death.”
“Ha. Ha. Ha.” Harry kicked the wall again.
McGonagall chuckled. “Let’s get you to Madam Malkin’s next. I
think your Muggle clothing might be attracting attention.”
They ran into two more well-wishers along the way.
McGonagall paused outside the door of Madam Malkin’s Robes. It
was a genuinely boring storefront, mostly brick that was red like ordinary brick, and glass windows showing plain black robes. Not robes
that shone or changed or spun or radiated strange rays that seemed to
go right through your shirt and tickle you. Just plain black robes—or
at least that was all you could see through the window. The door was
propped wide open, as if to advertise that there were no secrets here and
nothing to hide.
“I’m going to go oﬀ for a few minutes while you get ﬁtted for your
robes,” McGonagall said. “Will you be all right with that?”
Harry nodded. He hated clothes shopping with a ﬁery passion and
couldn’t blame McGonagall for feeling the same way.
McGonagall tapped his head with her wand. “You’ll need to be clear
to Madam Malkin’s senses, so I’m taking oﬀ the Obfuscation.”
“Uh...” Harry said. That did worry him a little.
“I went to Hogwarts with Madam Malkin,” McGonagall said. “Even
then, she was one of the most composed people I knew. She wouldn’t
turn a hair if You-Know-Who himself walked into her shop.” McGona*

43

*

**
*

CHAPTER FI V E

*
*

*

gall’s voice was reminiscent, and very approving. “Madam Malkin won’t
bother you, and she won’t let anyone else bother you.”
“Where are you going?” Harry inquired. “Just in case, you know,
something does happen.”
McGonagall gave Harry a hard, skeptical look. “I am going there,”
she said, pointing at a building across the street which showed the sign
of a wooden keg, “and buying a drink, which I desperately need. You are
to get ﬁtted for your robes, nothing else. I will come back to check up on
you shortly, and I expect to ﬁnd Madam Malkin’s shop still standing and
not in any way on ﬁre.”
Madam Malkin was a bustling old woman who didn’t say a word
about Harry when she saw the scar on his forehead, and she shot a
sharp look at an assistant when that girl seemed about to say something.
Madam Malkin got out a set of animated, writhing bits of cloth that
seemed to serve as tape measures and set to work examining the medium
of her art.
Next to Harry, a pale young boy with a pointed face and awesomecool blonde-white hair seemed to be going through the ﬁnal stages of a
similar process. One of Malkin’s two assistants was carefully examining
the white-haired boy and the checkerboard-gridded robe he was wearing;
occasionally she would tap a corner of the robe with her wand, and the
robe would loosen or tighten.
“Hello,” said the boy. “Hogwarts, too?”
Harry could predict where this conversation was about to go, and he
decided in a split second of frustration that enough was enough.
“Good heavens,” whispered Harry, “it couldn’t be.” He let his eyes
widen. “Your... name, sir?”
“Draco Malfoy,” said Draco Malfoy, looking slightly puzzled.
“It is you! Draco Malfoy. I—I never thought I’d be so honored, sir.”
Harry wished he could make tears come out of his eyes. The others
usually started crying at around this point.
“Oh,” said Draco, sounding a little confused. Then his lips stretched
in a smug smile. “It’s good to meet someone who knows his place.”
One of the assistants, the one who’d seemed to recognize Harry,
made a muﬄed choking sound.
*

44

*

**
*

THE FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTION ERROR

*
*

*

Harry burbled on. “I’m delighted to meet you, Mr. Malfoy. Just
unutterably delighted. And to be attending Hogwarts in your very year!
It makes my heart swoon.”
Oops. That last part might have sounded a little odd, like he was
hitting on Draco or something.
“And it lightens my heart as well to see that I can expect to be treated
with the respect due the Malfoy family,” the other boy lobbed back,
accompanied by a smile such as the highest of kings might bestow upon
the least of his subjects, if that subject were honest, though poor.
Eh... Damn, Harry was having trouble thinking up his next line.
Well, everyone did want to shake the hand of Harry Potter, so—“When
my clothes are ﬁtted, sir, might you deign to shake my hand? I should
wish nothing more to put the capper upon this day, nay, this month,
indeed, my whole lifetime.”
Draco glared in return. “I think you ask an unwarranted familiarity
with my person! What have you ever done for the Malfoy family that
entitles you to such a request?”
Oh, I am so totally trying this routine on the next person who wants to
shake my hand. Harry bowed his head. “No, no, sir, I understand. I’m
sorry for asking. I should be honored to clean your boots, rather.”
“Indeed,” snapped Draco. His stern face lightened somewhat.
“Though your wish is understandable enough. Tell me, what House do
you think you might be sorted into? I’m bound for Slytherin House,
of course, like my father Lucius before me. And for you, I should guess
House Huﬄepuﬀ, or possibly House Elf.”
Harry grinned sheepishly. “Professor McGonagall says that I’m the
most Ravenclaw person she’s ever seen or heard tell of in legend, so much
so that Rowena herself would tell me to get out more, whatever that
means, and that I’ll undoubtedly end up in Ravenclaw House if the Sorting Hat isn’t screaming in horror too loudly for the rest of us to make
out any words, end quote.”
“Wow,” Draco said, sounding slightly impressed. He gave a sort of
wistful sigh. “Your ﬂattery was great, or I thought so, anyway—you’d
do well in Slytherin House, too. Usually it’s only my father who gets
that sort of groveling. I’m hoping the other Slytherins will suck up to
*

45

*

**
*

CHAPTER FI V E

*
*

*

me now I’m at Hogwarts... I guess this is a good sign, then.”
Harry coughed. “Actually, sorry, I’ve got no idea who you are really.”
“Oh come on!” Draco said with ﬁerce disappointment. “Why’d you
go and do that, then?” Draco’s eyes widened with sudden suspicion.
“And how do you not know about the Malfoys? And what are those
clothes you’re wearing? Are your parents Muggles?”
“Two of my parents are dead,” Harry said. His heart twinged. When
he put it that way—“My other two parents are Muggles, and they’re the
ones that raised me.”
“What?” said Draco. “Who are you?”
“Harry Potter, pleased to meet you.”
“Harry Potter?” gasped Draco. “The Harry—” and the boy cut oﬀ
abruptly.
There was a brief silence.
Then, with bright enthusiasm, “Harry Potter? The Harry Potter?
Gosh, I’ve always wanted to meet you!”
Draco’s attendant emitted a sound like she was strangling but kept
on with her work, lifting Draco’s arms to carefully remove the checkerboard robe.
“Shut up,” Harry suggested.
“Can I have your autograph? No, wait, I want a picture with you
ﬁrst!”
“Shutupshutupshutup.”
“I’m just so inexpressibly delighted to meet you!”
“Burst into ﬂames and die.”
“But you’re Harry Potter, the glorious saviour of the wizarding
world, defeater of the Dark Lord! Everyone’s hero, Harry Potter! I’ve
always wanted to be just like you when I grow up so I can defeat Dark
Lords too—”
Draco cut oﬀ the words in mid-sentence. His face froze in absolute
horror.
Tall, white-haired, coldly elegant in black robes of the ﬁnest quality.
One hand gripping a silver-handled cane that took on the character of a
deadly weapon just by being in that hand. His eyes regarded the room
*

46

*

**
*

THE FUNDAMENTAL ATTRIBUTION ERROR

*
*

*

with the dispassionate quality of an executioner, a man to whom killing
was not painful, or even deliciously forbidden, but just a routine activity
like breathing. Perfection was the word that came automatically to mind.
That was the man who had, just that moment, strolled in through
the open door.
“Draco,” said the man, low and very angry, “what are you saying?”
In one split second of sympathetic panic, Harry formulated a rescue
plan.
“Lucius Malfoy!” gasped Harry Potter. “The Lucius Malfoy?”
One of Malkin’s assistants had to turn away and face the wall.
Cool, murderous eyes regarded him. “Harry Potter.”
“I am so, so honored to meet you!”
The dark eyes widened, shocked surprise replacing deadly threat.
“Your son has been telling me all about you,” Harry gushed on,
hardly even knowing what was coming out of his mouth but just talking
as fast as possible. “But of course I knew about you all before then, everyone knows about you, the great Lucius Malfoy! The most honored
laureate of all the House of Slytherin, I’ve been thinking about trying to
get into Slytherin House myself just because I heard you were in it as a
child—”
“What are you saying, Mr. Potter?” came a near-scream from outside
the shop, and Professor McGonagall burst in a second later.
There was such pure horror on her face that Harry’s mouth opened
automatically, and then blocked on nothing-to-say.
“Professor McGonagall!” cried Draco. “Is it really you? I’ve heard
so much about you from my father, I’ve been thinking of trying to get
Sorted into Gryﬃndor so I can—”
“What?” bellowed Lucius Malfoy and Professor McGonagall in perfect unison, standing side-by-side. Their heads swiveled to look at each
other in duplicate motions, and then the two recoiled from one another
as though performing a synchronized dance.
There was a sudden ﬂurry of action as Lucius seized Draco and
dragged him out of the shop.
And then there was silence.
McGonagall looked down at the small glass of wine that had been in
*

47

*

**
*

CHAPTER FI V E

*
*

*

her hand. It was tilted over on its side, forgotten in the rush, and only a
few drops of alcohol now clung to it.
McGonagall strode forward into the shop until she was opposite
Madam Malkin.
“Madam Malkin,” McGonagall said, her voice calm. “What has been
happening here?”
Madam Malkin looked back silently for four seconds, and then
cracked up. She fell against the wall, wheezing out laughter, and that
set oﬀ both of her assistants, one of whom fell to her hands and knees
on the ﬂoor, giggling hysterically.
McGonagall slowly turned to look at Harry, her expression chilly.
“I leave you alone for ﬁve minutes. Five minutes, Mr. Potter, by the very
clock.”
“I was only joking around,” Harry protested, as the sounds of hysterical laughter went on nearby.
“Draco Malfoy said in front of his father that he wanted to be sorted into
Gryﬃndor! Joking around isn’t enough to do that!” McGonagall paused,
breathing heavily. “What part of ‘get ﬁtted for robes’ sounded to you
like please cast a Confundus Charm on the entire universe!”
“He was in a situational context where those actions made internal
sense—”
“No. Don’t explain. I don’t want to know what happened in here.
Ever. There are some things I was not meant to know, and this is one
of them. Whatever demonic force of chaos inhabits you, it is contagious,
and I don’t want to end up like poor Draco Malfoy, poor Madam Malkin
and her two poor assistants.”
Harry sighed. It was clear that Professor McGonagall wasn’t in a
mood to listen to reasonable explanations. He looked at Madam Malkin,
who was still wheezing against the wall, and Malkin’s two assistants,
who had now both fallen to their knees, and ﬁnally down at his own
tape-measure-draped body.
“I’m not quite done being ﬁtted for clothes,” Harry said kindly.
“Why don’t you go back and have another drink?”

*

48

*

CHAPTER

SIX

THE PLANNING FALLACY
You think your day was surreal? Try mine.

**
*
ome people would have waited until after their ﬁrst trip to Diagon
Alley. “Bag of element 79,” Harry said, and withdrew his hand,
empty, from the mokeskin pouch.
Most people would have at least waited to get their wands ﬁrst.
“Bag of okane,” said Harry. The heavy bag of gold popped up into
his hand.
Harry withdrew the bag, then plunged it again into the mokeskin
pouch. He took out his hand, put it back in, and said, “Bag of tokens of
economic exchange.” That time his hand came out empty.
Harry Potter had gotten his hands on at least one magical item. Why
wait?
“Professor McGonagall,” Harry said to the bemused witch strolling
beside him, “can you give me two words, one word for gold, and one
word for something else that isn’t money, in a language that I wouldn’t
know? But don’t tell me which is which.”
“Ahava and zahav,” said McGonagall. “That’s Hebrew, and the other
word means love.”
“Thank you, Professor. Bag of ahava.” Empty.
“Bag of zahav.” And it popped up into his hand.
“Zahav is gold?” Harry questioned, and McGonagall nodded.

S

*

49

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

Harry thought over his collected experimental data. It was only the
most crude and preliminary sort of eﬀort, but it was enough to support
at least one conclusion:
“Aaaaaaarrrgh this doesn’t make any sense!”
The witch beside him lifted a lofty eyebrow. “Problems, Mr. Potter?”
“I just falsiﬁed every single hypothesis I had! How can it know that
‘bag of 115 Galleons’ is okay but not ‘bag of 90 plus 25 Galleons’? It can
count but it can’t add? It can understand nouns, but not noun phrases
that mean the same thing? The person who made this probably didn’t
speak Japanese and I don’t speak any Hebrew, so it’s not using their
knowledge, and it’s not using my knowledge—” Harry waved a hand
helplessly. “The rules seem sorta consistent but they don’t mean anything! I’m not even going to ask how a pouch ends up with voice recognition and natural language understanding when the best Artiﬁcial Intelligence programmers can’t get the fastest supercomputers to do it after
thirty-ﬁve years of hard work,” Harry gasped for breath, “but what is
going on?”
“Magic,” said Professor McGonagall. She shrugged.
“That’s just a word! Even after you tell me that, I can’t make any
new predictions! It’s exactly like saying ‘phlogiston’ or ‘elan vital’ or
‘emergence’ or ‘complexity’!”
Professor McGonagall laughed aloud. “But it is magic, Mr. Potter.”
Harry slumped over a little. “With respect, Professor McGonagall,
I’m not quite sure you understand what I’m trying to do here.”
“With respect, Mr. Potter, I’m quite sure I don’t. Unless—this is just
a guess, mind—you’re trying to take over the world?”
“No! I mean yes—well, no!”
“I think I should perhaps be alarmed that you have trouble answering
the question.”
Harry glumly considered the Dartmouth Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence in 1956. It had been the ﬁrst conference ever on the topic,
the one that had coined the phrase “Artiﬁcial Intelligence”. They had
identiﬁed key problems such as making computers understand language,
learn, and improve themselves. They had suggested, in perfect seriousness, that signiﬁcant advances on these problems might be made by ten
*

50

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

scientists working together for two months.
No. Chin up. You’re just starting on the problem of unraveling all the
secrets of magic. You don’t actually know whether it’s going to be too diﬃcult
to do in two months.
“And you really haven’t heard of other wizards asking these sorts of
questions or doing this sort of scientiﬁc experimenting?” Harry asked
again. It just seemed so obvious to him.
Then again, it’d taken more than two hundred years after the invention of the scientiﬁc method before any Muggle scientists thought to
systematically investigate what a human four-year-old could or couldn’t
understand. They could’ve found out in the eighteenth century but no
one even thought to look until the twentieth. So you couldn’t really
blame the much smaller wizarding world for not investigating the Retrieval Charm.
McGonagall, after pursing her lips for a moment, shrugged. “I’m
still not sure what you mean by ‘scientiﬁc experimenting’, Mr. Potter.
As I said, I’ve seen Muggleborn students try to get Muggle science to
work inside Hogwarts, and people invent new Charms and Potions every year.”
Harry shook his head. “Technology isn’t the same thing as science
at all. And trying lots of diﬀerent ways to do something isn’t the same
as experimenting to ﬁgure out the rules.” There were plenty of people
who’d tried to invent ﬂying machines by trying out lots of things-withwings, but only the Wright Brothers had built a wind tunnel... “Um,
how many Muggle-raised children do you get at Hogwarts every year?”
McGonagall looked thoughtful for a moment. “Around ten or so?”
Harry missed a step and almost tripped over his own feet. “Ten?”
The Muggle world had a population of six billion and counting. If
you were one in a million, there were twelve of you in New York and a
thousand more in China. It was inevitable that the Muggle world would
produce some eleven-year-olds who could do calculus—Harry knew he
wasn’t the only one. He’d met other prodigies in math competitions.
In fact he’d been thoroughly trounced by competitors who probably
spent literally all day practicing math problems and who’d never read
a science-ﬁction book and who would burn out completely before pu*

51

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

berty and never amount to anything in their future lives because they’d
just practiced known techniques instead of learning to think creatively.
(Harry was something of a sore loser.)
But... in the wizarding world...
Ten Muggle-raised children per year, who’d all ended their Muggle
educations at the age of eleven? And McGonagall might be biased, but
she had claimed that Hogwarts was the largest and most eminent wizarding school in the world... and it only educated up to the age of seventeen.
Professor McGonagall undoubtedly knew every last detail of how
you went about turning into a cat. But she seemed to have literally never
heard of the scientiﬁc method. To her it was just Muggle magic. And
she didn’t even seem curious about what secrets might be hiding behind
the natural language understanding of the Retrieval Charm.
That left two possibilities, really.
Possibility one: Magic was so incredibly opaque, convoluted, and
impenetrable, that even though wizards and witches had tried their best
to understand, they’d made little or no progress and eventually given up;
and Harry would do no better.
Or...
Harry cracked his knuckles in determination, but they only made a
quiet sort of clicking sound, rather than echoing ominously oﬀ the walls
of Diagon Alley.
Possibility two: He’d be taking over the world.
Eventually. Perhaps not right away.
That sort of thing did sometimes take longer than two months. Muggle science hadn’t gone to the moon in the ﬁrst week after Galileo.
But Harry still couldn’t stop the huge smile that was stretching his
cheeks so wide they were starting to hurt.
He’d always been frightened of ending up as one of those child prodigies that never amounted to anything and spent the rest of their lives
boasting about how cool they’d been at age ten. But then most adult
geniuses never amounted to anything either. There were probably like
a thousand people as intelligent as Einstein for every actual Einstein in
history. Because they hadn’t gotten their hands on the one thing you absolutely needed to achieve greatness. They’d never found an important
*

52

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

problem.
You’re mine now, Harry thought at the walls of Diagon Alley, and all
the shops and items, and all the shopkeepers and customers; and all the
lands and people of wizarding Britain, and all the wider wizarding world;
and the entire greater universe of which Muggle scientists understood so
much less than they believed. I, Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres, do now
claim this territory in the name of Science.
Lightning and thunder completely failed to ﬂash and boom in the
cloudless skies.
“What are you smiling about?” inquired McGonagall, warily and
wearily.
“I’m wondering if there’s a spell to make lightning ﬂash in the background whenever I make an ominous resolution,” explained Harry. He
was carefully memorizing the exact words of his ominous resolution so
that future history books would get it right.
“I have a distant feeling that I ought to be doing something about
this,” sighed McGonagall.
“Ignore it, it’ll go away. Ooh, shiny!” Harry put his thoughts of
world conquest temporarily on hold and skipped over to a shop with an
open display, and Professor McGonagall followed.

**
*
Harry had now bought his potions ingredients and cauldron, and, oh, a
few more things. Items that seemed like good things to carry in Harry’s
Bag of Holding (aka Moke Super Pouch qx31 with Undetectable Extension Charm, Retrieval Charm, and Widening Lip). Smart, sensible
purchases.
Harry genuinely didn’t understand why McGonagall was looking so
suspicious.
Right now, Harry was in a shop whose storefront rated the twisting
main street of Diagon Alley. The store had an open front with merchandise laid out on slanted wooden displays, guarded only by slight
*

53

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

gray glows and a young-looking salesgirl in a much-shortened version of
witch’s robes that exposed her knees and elbows.
Harry was examining the wizarding equivalent of a ﬁrst-aid kit, the
Emergency Healing Pack Plus. There were two self-tightening tourniquets. A Stabilization Potion, which would slow blood loss and prevent
shock. A syringe of what looked like liquid ﬁre, which was supposed
to drastically slow circulation in a treated area while maintaining oxygenation of the blood for up to three minutes, if you needed to prevent
a poison from spreading through the body. White cloth that could be
wrapped over a part of the body to temporarily numb pain. Plus any
number of other items that Harry totally failed to comprehend, like
the “Dementor Exposure Treatment”, which looked and smelled like
ordinary chocolate. Or the “Baﬄesnaﬄe Counter”, which looked like
a small quivering egg and carried a placard showing how to jam it up
someone’s nostril.
“A deﬁnite buy at ﬁve Galleons, wouldn’t you agree?” Harry said to
McGonagall, and the teenage salesgirl hovering nearby nodded eagerly.
Harry had expected McGonagall to make some sort of approving
remark about his prudence and preparedness.
What he was getting instead could only be described as the Evil Eye.
“And just why,” said Professor McGonagall with rather heavy skepticism, “do you expect to need a healer’s kit, young man?” (After the unfortunate incident at the Potions store, McGonagall was trying to avoid
saying “Mr. Potter” while anyone else was nearby.)
Harry’s mouth opened and closed. “I don’t expect to need it! It’s just
in case!”
“Just in case of what?”
Harry’s eyes widened. “You think I’m planning to do something
dangerous and that’s why I want a medical kit?”
The look of grim suspicion and ironic disbelief that McGonagall gave
him was answer enough.
“Great Scott!” Harry said. (This was an expression he’d learned from
the mad scientist Doc Brown in Back to the Future.) “Were you also
thinking that when I bought the Feather-Falling Potion, the Gillyweed,
and the bottle of Food and Water Pills?”
*

54

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

“Yes.”
Harry shook his head in amazement. “Just what sort of plan do you
think I have going, here?”
“I don’t know,” McGonagall said darkly, “but it ends either in you
delivering a ton of silver to Gringotts, or in world domination.”
“World domination is such an ugly phrase. I prefer to call it world
optimization.”
This failed to reassure Professor McGonagall, who was still giving
him the Look of Doom.
“Wow,” Harry said, realizing that she was serious. “You really think
that. You really think I’m planning to do something dangerous.”
“Yes.”
“Like that’s the only reason anyone would ever buy a ﬁrst-aid kit?
Don’t take this the wrong way, Professor McGonagall, but what sort of
crazy children are you used to dealing with?”
“Gryﬃndors,” spat Professor McGonagall, the word carrying a
freight of bitterness and despair that fell like an eternal curse on all
youthful heroism and high spirits.
“Deputy Headmistress Professor Minerva McGonagall,” Harry said,
putting his hands sternly on his hips. “I am not going to be in Gryﬃndor—”
At this point McGonagall interjected something about how if he was
she would ﬁgure out how to kill a hat, which strange remark Harry
let pass without comment, though the salesgirl seemed to be having a
sudden coughing ﬁt.
“—I am going to be in Ravenclaw. And if you really think that I’m
planning to do something dangerous, then, with respect, you don’t understand me at all. I don’t like danger, it is scary. I am being prudent. I
am being cautious. I am preparing for unforeseen contingencies. Like my
parents used to sing to me: Be prepared! That’s the Boy Scout’s marching
song! Be prepared! As through life you march along! Don’t be nervous, don’t
be ﬂustered, don’t be scared—be prepared!”
(Harry’s parents had in fact only ever sung him those particular lines
of that Tom Lehrer song, and Harry was blissfully unaware of the rest.)
McGonagall’s stance had slightly softened—though mostly when
*

55

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

Harry had reminded her that he was heading for Ravenclaw. “What
sort of contingency do you imagine this kit might prepare you for,
young man?”
“One of my classmates gets bitten by a horrible monster, and as I
scrabble frantically in my mokeskin pouch for something that could help
her, she looks at me sadly and with her last breath says, ‘Why weren’t you
prepared?’ And then she dies, and I know as her eyes close that she won’t
ever forgive me—”
Harry heard the salesgirl gasp, and he looked up to see her staring at
him with her lips pressed tight. Then the young woman turned and ﬂed
into the deeper store.
What...?
Professor McGonagall reached down, and took Harry’s hand in hers,
gently but very ﬁrmly, and pulled Harry out of the main street of Diagon
Alley, leading him into a byway between two shops that was paved in
dirty bricks and which dead-ended in a wall of solid black dirt.
The tall witch pointed her wand at the main street and spoke, “Quietus” she said, and a screen of silence descended around them, blocking
out all the street noises.
What did I do wrong...
Then the witch turned and sent Harry with a full-powered, icy glare.
“I will thank you to remember, Mr. Potter, that there was a war in wizarding Britain not ten years ago and that everyone here has lost someone
and that talking about friends dying in your arms is, not, done!”
“I, I didn’t mean to—” The inference dropped like a falling stone into
Harry’s exceptionally vivid imagination. The war had ended ten years
ago so that girl would have been eight or nine years old, at most, when,
when, “I’m sorry, I didn’t mean to...” Harry choked up, and turned
away to run from McGonagall’s cold stare but there was a wall of dirt
blocking his way and he didn’t have his wand yet. “I’m sorry, I’m sorry,
I’m sorry!”
There came a heavy sigh from behind him. “I know you are, Mr. Potter.”
Harry dared to peek behind him. The anger was gone from Professor McGonagall’s face. “I’m sorry,” Harry said again, feeling absolutely
*

56

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

wretched. “I shouldn’t have said that. Did anything like that happen
to—” and then Harry shut his lips and slapped a hand over his mouth
for good measure.
McGonagall’s face grew a little sadder. “You must learn to think
before you speak, Mr. Potter. Otherwise you’ll go through life without
many friends. That has been the fate of many a Ravenclaw, and I hope
it will not be yours.”
Harry wanted to just run away. He wanted to pull out a wand and
erase the whole thing from McGonagall’s memory, be back with her
outside the shop again, make it didn’t happen—
“But to answer your question,” said McGonagall, “no, nothing like
that has ever happened to me.” Her face twisted. “Certainly I’ve watched
a friend breathe their last breath, once or twice or a few times. But not
one of them ever cursed me as they died, and I never thought that they
wouldn’t forgive me. What in Merlin’s name possessed you to say such a
thing, Harry Potter? Why would you even think it?”
Tears were creeping down Harry’s cheeks. “I’m sorry, I shouldn’t
have said anything to you, I’m sorry—”
McGonagall drew in a tight breath. “I know you’re sorry. What I
don’t understand is why an eleven-year-old boy is thinking about such
things. Did you really decide to buy a ﬁve-Galleon healer’s kit to carry
in a ﬁfteen-Galleon pouch because you’re convinced that otherwise your
classmates will curse you as they die?”
“I, I, I,” Harry swallowed. “It’s just that I always try to imagine the
worst thing that could happen,” and maybe he’d also been joking around
a little but he would rather have bitten oﬀ his own tongue than say that
now.
“Why?”
“So I can stop it from happening!”
“Mr. Potter...” McGonagall’s voice trailed oﬀ. Then she sighed, and
knelt down beside him. “Mr. Potter,” she said, gently now, “it’s not your
responsibility to take care of the students at Hogwarts. It’s mine. I won’t
let anything bad happen to you or anyone else. Hogwarts is the safest
place in all wizarding Britain, and Madam Pomfrey has a full healer’s
oﬃce. You don’t need a healer’s kit.”
*

57

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

“But I do!” Harry burst out. “Nowhere is perfectly safe! And what
if my parents have a heart attack or get in an accident when I go home
for Christmas—Madam Pomfrey won’t be there, I’ll need a healer’s kit
of my own—”
“What in Merlin’s name...” said McGonagall. She stood up, and
looked down at Harry an expression torn between concern and annoyance. “There’s no need to think about such terrible things, Mr. Potter!”
Harry’s expression twisted up into bitterness, at hearing that. “Yes
there is! If you don’t think, you don’t just get hurt yourself, you end up
hurting other people!”
Professor McGonagall opened her mouth, then closed it. She rubbed
the bridge of her nose, looking thoughtful. “Mr. Potter... if I were to
oﬀer to stay quiet and listen to you for a while... is there anything you’d
like to talk to me about?”
“About what?”
“About why you’re convinced that you always have to be on your
guard against terrible things happening to you.”
Harry stared at her in puzzlement. That was a self-evident axiom.
“Well...” Harry said slowly. He tried to organize his thoughts. How
could he explain himself to McGonagall, when she didn’t even know the
basics? “Muggle researchers have found that people are always very optimistic, like they say something will take two days and it takes ten, or
they say it’ll take two months and it takes over thirty-ﬁve years. Like,
they asked students for times by which they were 50% sure, 75% sure,
and 99% sure they’d complete their homework, and only 13%, 19%,
and 45% of the students ﬁnished by those times. And they found that
the reason was that when they asked people for their best-case estimates
if everything went as well as possible, and their average-case estimates
if everything went as normal, they got back answers that were statistically indistinguishable. See, if you ask someone what they expect in the
normal case, they visualize what looks like the line of maximum probability at each step along the way—namely, everything going according to
plan, without any mistakes or surprises. But actually, since more than
half the students didn’t ﬁnish by the time they were 99% sure they’d be
done, reality usually delivers results a little worse than the ‘worst-case
*

58

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

scenario’. It’s called the planning fallacy, and the best way to ﬁx it is to
ask how long things took the last time you tried them. That’s called using the outside view instead of the inside view. But when you’re doing
something new and can’t do that, you just have to be really, really, really pessimistic. Like, so pessimistic that reality actually comes out better
than you expected around as often and as much as it comes out worse.
It’s actually really hard to be so pessimistic that you stand a decent chance
of undershooting real life. Like I make this big eﬀort to be gloomy and I
imagine one of my classmates getting bitten, but what actually happens
is that the surviving Death Eaters attack the whole school to get at me.
But on a happier note—”
“Stop,” McGonagall said.
Harry stopped. He had just been about to point out that at least they
knew the Dark Lord wouldn’t attack, since he was dead.
“I think I might not have made myself clear,” McGonagall said carefully. “Did anything happen to you personally that would scare you?”
“What happened to me personally is only anecdotal evidence,”
Harry explained to her. “It doesn’t carry the same weight as a replicated, peer-reviewed journal article about a controlled study with random assignment, many subjects, large eﬀect sizes and strong statistical
signiﬁcance.”
McGonagall pinched the bridge of her nose, inhaled, and exhaled. “I
would still like to hear about it,” she said.
“Um...” Harry said. He took a deep breath. “There’d been some
muggings in our neighborhood, and my mother asked me to return a pan
she’d borrowed to a neighbor two blocks down, and I said I didn’t want
to because I might get mugged, and she said, ‘Harry, don’t say things
like that!’ Like thinking about it would make it happen, so if I didn’t
talk about it, I would be safe. I tried to explain it to her and she made
me carry over the pan anyway. I was too young to know how statistically
unlikely it was for a mugger to target me, but I was old enough to know
that not-thinking about something doesn’t stop it from happening, so I
was really scared.”
“Nothing else?” McGonagall said after a pause, when it became clear
that Harry was done. “There isn’t anything else that happened to you?”
*

59

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

“I know it doesn’t sound like much,” Harry defended. “But it was just
one of those critical life moments, you know? I mean, I knew that not
thinking about something doesn’t stop it from happening, I knew that,
but I could see that Mom really thought that way.” Harry stopped, struggling with the anger that was starting to rise up again when he thought
about it. “She wouldn’t listen. I tried to tell her, I begged her not to send
me out, and she laughed it oﬀ. Everything I said, she treated like some
sort of big joke...” Harry forced the black rage back down again. “That’s
when I realized that everyone who was supposed to protect me was actually crazy, and that they wouldn’t listen to me no matter how much
I begged them, and that I couldn’t ever rely on them to get anything
right.” Sometimes good intentions weren’t enough, sometimes you had
to be sane...
There was a long silence.
Harry took the time to breathe deeply and calm himself down.
There was no point in getting angry. There was no point in getting
angry. All parents were like that, no adult would give up so much status
as to place themselves on level ground with a child, his genetic parents
would have been no diﬀerent. Sanity was a tiny spark in the night, an
inﬁnitesimally rare exception to the rule and dominion of madness, so
there was no point in getting angry.
Harry didn’t like himself when he was angry.
“Thank you for sharing that, Mr. Potter,” said McGonagall after a
while. There was an abstracted look on her face (almost exactly the
same look that had appeared on Harry’s own face while experimenting
on the pouch, if Harry had only seen himself in a mirror to realize that).
“I shall have to think about this.” She turned toward the alley mouthway,
and raised her wand—
“Um,” Harry said, “can we go get the healer’s kit now?”
McGonagall paused, and looked back at him steadily. “And if I say
no, it’s too expensive and you won’t need it, what happens?”
Harry’s face twisted in bitterness. “Exactly what you’re thinking,
Professor McGonagall. Exactly what you’re thinking. I conclude you’re
another crazy adult I can’t talk to, and I start planning how to get my
hands on a healer’s kit anyway.”
*

60

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

“I am your guardian on this trip,” McGonagall said with a tinge of
danger. “I will not allow you to push me around.”
“I understand,” Harry said. He kept the resentment out of his voice,
and didn’t say any of the other things that came to mind. McGonagall
had told him to think before he spoke. He probably wouldn’t remember
that tomorrow, but he could at least remember it for ﬁve minutes.
McGonagall’s wand twitched, and the noises of Diagon Alley came
back. “All right, young man,” she said. “Let’s go get that healer’s kit.”
Harry’s jaw dropped in surprise. Then he hurried after her, almost
stumbling in his sudden rush.

**
*
The store was the same as they had left it, recognizable and unrecognizable items still laid out on the slanted wooden display, the gray glow still
protecting and the salesgirl back in her old position. The salesgirl looked
up as they approached, her face showing surprise.
“I’m sorry,” she said as they got closer, and Harry spoke at almost
the same moment, “I apologize for—”
They broke oﬀ and looked at each other, and then the salesgirl
laughed a little. “I didn’t mean to get you in trouble with Professor
McGonagall,” she said. Her voice lowered conspiratorily. “I hope she
wasn’t too awful to you.”
“Della!” said McGonagall, scandalized.
“Bag of gold,” Harry said to his pouch, and then looked back up at
the salesgirl while he counted out ﬁve Galleons. “Don’t worry, I understand that she’s only awful to me because she loves me.”
He handed the Galleons to the salesgirl while McGonagall was spluttering something unimportant. “One Emergency Healing Pack Plus,
please.”
It was actually sort of unnerving to see how the Widening Lip swallowed the briefcase-sized medical kit. Harry couldn’t help wondering
*

61

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

what would happen if he tried climbing into the mokeskin pouch himself, given that only the person who put something in was supposed to
be able to take it out again.
When the pouch was done... eating... his hard-won purchase, Harry
swore he heard a small burping sound afterward. That had to have been
spelled in on purpose. The alternative hypothesis was too horrifying
to contemplate... in fact Harry couldn’t even think of any alternative
hypotheses. Harry looked back up at McGonagall. “Where to next?”
McGonagall pointed toward a store that looked as if it had been made
from ﬂesh instead of bricks and covered in fur instead of paint. “Small
pets are permitted at Hogwarts—you could get an owl to send letters, for
example—”
“Can I pay a Knut or something and rent an owl when I need to send
mail?”
“Yes,” said McGonagall.
“Then I think emphatically no.”
McGonagall nodded, as though ticking oﬀ a point. “Might I ask why
not?”
“I had a pet rock once. It died.”
“You don’t think you could take care of a pet?”
“I could,” Harry said, “but I would end up obsessing all day long
about whether I’d remembered to feed it that day or if it was slowly starving in its cage, wondering where its master was and why there wasn’t any
food.”
“That poor owl,” McGonagall said in a soft voice. “Abandoned like
that. I wonder what it would do.”
“Well, it’d get really hungry and start trying to claw its way out of
the cage or the box or whatever, though it probably wouldn’t have much
luck with that—” Harry stopped short.
McGonagall went on, still in that soft voice. “And what would happen to it afterward?”
“Excuse me,” Harry said, and he took McGonagall by the hand, gently but ﬁrmly, and steered her into yet another byway; after ducking so
many well-wishers the process had become almost unnoticeably routine.
“Please cast that Quietus thingy.”
*

62

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

“Quietus.”
Harry’s voice was shaking. “That owl does not represent me, my
parents never locked me in a closet and left me to starve, I do not have
abandonment fears and I don’t like the trend of your thoughts, Professor
McGonagall!”
The witch looked down at him. “And what thoughts would those
be, Mr. Potter?”
“You think I was,” Harry was having trouble saying it, “I was
abused?”
“Were you?”
“No!” Harry shouted. “No, I never was! Do you think I’m stupid?
I know about the concept of child abuse, I know about inappropriate
touching and all of that and if anything like that happened I would call
the police! And report it to the school principal! And look up government oﬃces in the phone book! And tell Grandma and Grandpa and
Mrs. Figg! But my parents never did anything like that, never ever ever!
How dare you suggest such a thing!”
McGonagall gazed at him steadily. “It is my duty as Deputy Headmistress to investigate possible signs of abuse in the children under my
care.”
Harry’s anger was spiraling out of control into pure, black fury.
“Don’t you ever dare breathe a word of these, these insinuations to anyone else! No one, do you hear me, McGonagall? An accusation like that
can ruin people and destroy families even when the parents are completely innocent! I’ve read about it in the newspapers!” Harry’s voice
was climbing to a high-pitched scream. “The system doesn’t know how
to stop, it doesn’t believe the parents or the children when they say nothing happened! Don’t you dare threaten my family with that! I won’t let you
destroy my home!”
“Harry,” McGonagall said softly, and she reached out a hand toward
him—
Harry took a fast step back, and his hand snapped up and knocked
hers away.
McGonagall froze, then she pulled her hand back, and took a step
backward. “Harry, it’s all right,” she said. “I believe you.”
*

63

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

“Do you,” Harry hissed. The fury still roaring through his blood.
“Or are you just waiting to get away from me so you can ﬁle the papers?”
“Harry, I saw your house. I saw with your parents. They love you.
You love them. I do believe you when you say that your parents are not
abusing you. But I had to ask, because there is something very strange
at work here.”
Harry stared at her coldly. “Like what?”
McGonagall took a deep breath. “Harry, I’ve seen a lot of abused
children in my time at Hogwarts, it would break your heart to know
how many. And, when you’re happy, you don’t behave like one of
those children, not at all. You smile at strangers, you hug people, I put
my hand on your shoulder and you didn’t ﬂinch. But sometimes, only
sometimes, you say or do something that seems very much like... someone who spent his ﬁrst eleven years locked in a basement. Not the loving
family that I saw.” McGonagall tilted her head, her expression growing
puzzled again.
Harry took this in, processing it. The black rage began to drain away,
as it dawned on him that he was being listened to respectfully, and that
his family wasn’t in danger.
“And how do you explain your observations, Professor McGonagall?”
“I don’t know,” she said. “But it’s possible that something could have
happened to you that you don’t remember.”
Fury rose up again in Harry. That sounded all too much like what
he’d read in the newspaper stories of shattered families. “Suppressed
memory is a load of pseudoscience! People do not repress traumatic memories, they remember them all too well for the rest of their lives!”
“No, Mr. Potter. There is a Charm called Obliviation.”
Harry froze in place. “A spell that erases memories?”
McGonagall nodded. “But not all the eﬀects of the experience, if you
see what I’m saying, Mr. Potter.”
A chill went down Harry’s spine. That hypothesis... could not be
easily refuted. “But my parents couldn’t do that!”
“No,” McGonagall said. “It would have taken someone from the
wizarding world. There’s... no way to test for it, I’m afraid, not that I
*

64

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

know.”
Harry’s rationalist skills began to boot up again. “Professor McGonagall, how sure are you of your observations, and what alternative
explanations could there also be?”
McGonagall opened her hands, as though to show their emptiness.
“Sure? I’m sure of nothing, Mr. Potter. If I consider your whole person,
then in all my life I’ve never met anyone else like you. Sometimes you
just don’t seem eleven years old or even all that human.”
Harry’s eyebrows rose toward the sky—
“I’m sorry!” McGonagall said quickly. “I’m very sorry, Mr. Potter.
I was trying to make a rhetorical point and I’m afraid that came out
sounding a bit diﬀerent from what I had in mind—”
“On the contrary, Professor McGonagall,” Harry said, and slowly
smiled. “I shall take it as a very great compliment. But would you mind
if I oﬀered an alternative explanation?”
“Please do.”
“Children aren’t meant to be too much smarter than their parents,”
Harry said. “Or too much saner, maybe—my father could probably
outsmart me if he was, you know, actually trying, instead of using his
adult intelligence mainly to come up with new reasons not to change his
mind—” Harry stopped. “I’m too smart, McGonagall. Normal children
simply aren’t in my league. Adults don’t respect me enough to really talk
to me. And frankly, even if they did, they wouldn’t sound as smart as
Richard Feynman, so I might as well read something Richard Feynman
wrote instead. I’m isolated, Professor McGonagall. I’ve been isolated my
whole life. Maybe that has some of the same eﬀects as being locked in
a basement. And I’m too intelligent to look up to my parents the way
that children are designed to do. My parents love me, but they don’t
feel obligated to respond to reason, and sometimes I feel like they’re the
children—children who won’t listen and have absolute authority over my
whole existence. I try not to be too bitter about it, but I also try to be
honest with myself, so, yes, I’m bitter. And I also have an anger management problem, but I’m working on it. That’s all.”
“That’s all?”
Harry nodded ﬁrmly. “That’s all. Surely, Professor McGonagall,
*

65

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

even in magical Britain, the normal explanation is always worth considering?”

**
*
It was later in the day, the sun lowering in the summer sky and shoppers beginning to peter out from the streets. Some stores had already
closed; Harry and McGonagall had bought his textbooks from Flourish
and Blotts just under the deadline. With only a slight explosion when
Harry had made a beeline for the keyword “Arithmancy” and discovered
that the seventh-year textbooks invoked nothing more mathematically
advanced than trigonometry.
At this moment, though, dreams of low-hanging research fruit were
very far from Harry’s mind.
At this moment, Harry and McGonagall were walking out of Ollivander’s, and Harry was staring at his wand. He’d waved it, and produced blue-bronze sparks, which really shouldn’t have come as such an
extra shock after everything else he’d seen, but somehow—
I can do magic.
Me. As in, me personally. I am magical; I am a wizard.
He had felt the magic pouring up his arm, and in that instant, realized
that he had always had that sense, that he had possessed it his whole
life, the sense that was not sight or sound or smell or taste or touch
but only magic. Like an eye that had always always been closed, the
corresponding brain area representing only darkness since the moment
of his birth; until one day the eye opened, and saw the world.
And—
“It is very curious indeed that you should be destined for this wand when
its brother why, its brother gave you that scar.”
That could not possibly be coincidence. There had been thousands of
wands in that shop. Well, okay, actually it could be coincidence, there
were six billion people in the world and thousand-to-one coincidences
happened every day. But Bayes’s Theorem 101: any reasonable hypothesis which said it was more likely than a thousand-to-one that he’d end
*

66

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

up with the brother to the Dark Lord’s wand, was going to have an advantage.
McGonagall had simply said how peculiar and left it at that, which
had put Harry into a state of shock at the sheer, overwhelming obliviousness of wizards and witches. In no imaginable world would Harry
have just went “Hm” and walked out of the shop without even trying to
come up with a hypothesis for what was going on.
His left hand rose and touched his scar.
What... exactly...
“You’re a full wizard now,” said McGonagall. “Congratulations.”
Harry nodded.
“And what do you think of the wizarding world?”
“It’s strange,” Harry said. “I ought to be thinking about everything
I’ve seen of magic... everything that I now know is possible, and everything I now know to be a lie, and all the work left before me to
understand it. And yet I ﬁnd myself distracted by relative trivialities
like,” Harry lowered his voice, “the whole Boy-Who-Lived thing.” There
didn’t seem to be anyone nearby, but no point tempting fate.
McGonagall ahemed. “Really? You don’t say.”
Harry nodded. “Yes. It’s just... odd. To ﬁnd out that you were part
of this grand story, the quest to defeat the great and terrible Dark Lord,
and it’s already done. Finished. Completely over with. Like you’re
Frodo Baggins and you ﬁnd out that your parents took you to Mount
Doom and had you toss in the Ring when you were one year old and
you don’t even remember it.”
McGonagall’s smile had grown somewhat ﬁxed.
“You know, if I were anyone else, anyone else at all, I’d probably be
pretty worried about living up to that start. Gosh, Harry, what have you
done since you defeated the Dark Lord? Your own bookstore? That’s great!
Say, did you know I named my child after you? But I have hopes that
this will not prove to be a problem.” Harry sighed. “Still... it’s almost
enough to make me wish that there were some loose ends from the quest,
just so I could say that I really, you know, participated somehow.”
“Oh?” said McGonagall in an odd tone. “What did you have in
mind?”
*

67

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

“Well, for example, you mentioned that my parents were betrayed.
Who betrayed them?”
“Sirius Black,” McGonagall said. She almost hissed the name. “He’s
in Azkaban. Wizarding prison.”
“How probable is it that Sirius Black will break out of prison and I’ll
have to track him down and defeat him in some sort of spectacular duel,
or better yet put a large bounty on his head and hide out in Australia
while I wait for the results?”
McGonagall blinked. Twice. “Not likely. No one has ever escaped
from Azkaban, and I doubt that he will be the ﬁrst.”
Harry was a bit skeptical of that “no one has ever escaped from Azkaban” line. Still, maybe with magic you could actually get close to a 100%
perfect prison, especially if you had a wand and they did not. The best
way to get out would be to not go there in the ﬁrst place.
“All right then,” Harry said. “Sounds pretty nicely wrapped up.”
He sighed, scrubbing his palm over his head. “Or maybe the Dark Lord
didn’t really die that night. Not completely. His spirit lingers, whispering to people in nightmares that bleed over into the waking world,
searching for a way back into the living lands he swore to destroy, and
now, in accordance with the ancient prophecy, he and I are locked in a
deadly duel where the winner shall lose and the loser shall win—”
McGonagall’s head swiveled, and her eyes darted around, searching
the street for listeners.
“I’m joking, Professor McGonagall,” Harry said with some annoyance. Jeebers, why did she always take everything so seriously—
A slow sinking sensation began to dawn in the pit of Harry’s stomach.
McGonagall looked at Harry with a calm expression. A very, very
calm expression. Then a smile was put on. “Of course you are, Mr. Potter.”
Aw crap.
If Harry had needed to rationalize the wordless inference that had
just ﬂashed into his mind, it would have come out something like, “If
I estimate the probability of McGonagall doing what I just saw as the
result of carefully controlling herself, versus the probability distribution
*

68

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

for all the things she would do naturally if I made a bad joke, then this
behavior is signiﬁcant evidence for her hiding something.”
But what Harry actually thought was, Aw crap.
Harry turned his own head to scan the street. Nope, no one nearby.
“He’s not dead, is he,” Harry sighed.
“Mr. Potter—”
“The Dark Lord is alive. Of course he’s alive. It was an act of utter
optimism for me to have even dreamed otherwise. I must have taken leave
of my senses, I can’t imagine what I was thinking. Just because someone
said that his body was found burned to a crisp, I can’t imagine why I
would have thought he was dead. Clearly I have much left to learn about
the art of proper pessimism.”
“Mr. Potter—”
“At least tell me there’s not really a prophecy...” But McGonagall was
still giving him that bright, ﬁxed smile. “Oh, you have got to be kidding
me.”
“Mr. Potter, you shouldn’t go inventing things to worry about—”
“Are you actually going to tell me that? Imagine my reaction later,
when I ﬁnd out that there was something to worry about after all.”
McGonagall’s smile faltered.
Harry’s shoulders slumped. “I have a whole world of magic to analyze. I do not have time for this.”
Then both of them shut up, as a man in ﬂowing orange robes appeared on the street and slowly passed them by. McGonagall’s eyes
tracked him, unobtrusively. Harry’s mouth was moving as he chewed
hard on his lip, and someone watching closely would have noticed a tiny
spot of blood appear.
When the orange-robed man had passed into the distance, Harry
spoke again, in a low murmur. “Are you going to tell me the truth now,
Professor McGonagall? And don’t bother trying to wave it oﬀ, I’m not
stupid.”
“You’re eleven years old, Mr. Potter!” she said in a harsh whisper.
“And therefore subhuman. Sorry... for a moment there, I forgot.”
“These are dreadful and important matters! They are secret, Mr. Potter! It is a catastrophe that you, still a child, know even this much! You
*

69

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

must not tell anyone, do you understand? Absolutely no one!”
As sometimes happened when Harry got suﬃciently angry, his blood
went cold, instead of hot, and a terrible dark clarity descended over his
mind, mapping out possible tactics and assessing their consequences with
iron realism.
Point out that you have a right to know: Failure. Eleven-year-old children do not have rights to know anything, in McGonagall’s eyes.
Say that you will not be friends any more: Failure. She does not value
your friendship suﬃciently.
Point out that you will be in danger if you do not know: Failure. Plans
have already been made based on your ignorance. The certain inconvenience of rethinking will seem far more unpalatable than the mere uncertain
prospect of your coming to harm.
Justice and reason will both fail. You must either ﬁnd something you
have that she wants, or ﬁnd something you can do which she fears...
Ah.
“Well then, Professor McGonagall,” Harry said in a low, icy tone, “it
sounds like I have something you want. You can, if you like, tell me the
truth, the whole truth, and in return I will keep your secrets. Or you
can try to keep me ignorant so you can use me as a pawn, in which case
I will owe you nothing.”
McGonagall stopped short in the street. Her eyes blazed and her
voice descended into an outright hiss. “How dare you!”
“How dare you!” he whispered back at her.
“You would blackmail me?”
Harry’s lips twisted. “I am oﬀering you a favor. I am giving you a
chance to keep your precious secret. If you refuse I will have every natural
motive to make inquiries elsewhere, not to spite you, but because I have
to know! Get past your pointless anger at a child who you think ought
to obey you, and you’ll realize that any sane adult would do the same!
Look at it from my perspective! How would you feel if it was YOU?”
Harry watched McGonagall, observed her harsh breathing. It occurred to him that it was time to ease oﬀ the pressure, let her simmer
for a while. “You don’t have to decide right away,” Harry said in a more
normal tone. “I’ll understand if you want time to think about my of*

70

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

fer... but I’ll warn you of one thing,” Harry said, his voice going colder.
“Don’t try that Obliviation Charm on me. Some time ago I worked
out a signal, and I have already sent that signal to myself. If I ﬁnd that
signal and I don’t remember sending it...” Harry let his voice trail oﬀ
signiﬁcantly.
McGonagall’s face was working as her expressions shifted. “I...
wasn’t thinking of Obliviating you, Mr. Potter... but why would you
have invented such a signal if you didn’t know about—”
“I thought of it while reading a Muggle science-ﬁction book, and said
to myself, well, just in case... And no, I won’t tell you the signal, I’m not
dumb.”
“I hadn’t planned to ask,” McGonagall said. She seemed to fold in
on herself, and suddenly looked very old, and very tired. “This has been
an exhausting day, Mr. Potter. Can we get your trunk, and send you
home? I will trust you not to speak upon this matter until I have had
time to think. Keep in mind that there are only two other people in
the whole world who know about this matter, and they are Headmaster
Albus Dumbledore and Professor Severus Snape.”
So. New information; that was a peace oﬀering. Harry nodded in
acceptance, and turned his head to look forward, and started walking
again.
“So now I’ve got to ﬁnd some way to kill an immortal Dark Wizard,”
Harry said, and sighed in frustration. “I really wish you had told me that
before I started shopping.”

**
*
The trunk shop was more richly appointed than any other shop Harry
had visited; the curtains were lush and delicately patterned, the ﬂoor and
walls of stained and polished wood, and the trunks occupied places of
honor on polished ivory platforms. The salesman was dressed in robes of
ﬁnery only a cut below those of Lucius Malfoy, and spoke with exquisite,
oily politeness to both Harry and McGonagall.
Harry had asked his questions, and had gravitated to a trunk of
heavy-looking wood, not polished but warm and solid, carved with the
*

71

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

pattern of a guardian dragon whose eyes shifted to look at anyone nearing it. A trunk charmed to be light, to shrink on command, to sprout
small clawed tentacles from its bottom and squirm after its owner. A
trunk with two drawers on each of four sides that each slid out to reveal compartments as deep as the whole trunk. A lid with four locks
each of which would reveal a diﬀerent space inside. And—this was the
important part—a handle on the bottom which slid out a frame containing a staircase leading down into a small, lighted room that would hold,
Harry estimated, around twelve bookcases.
If they made luggages like this, Harry didn’t know why anyone bothered owning a house.
One hundred and eight golden Galleons. That was the price of a
good trunk, lightly used. At around ﬁfty British pounds to the Galleon,
that was enough to buy a used car. It would be more expensive than
everything else Harry had ever bought in his whole life all put together.
Ninety-seven Galleons. That was how much was left in the bag of
gold Harry had been allowed to take out of Gringotts.
McGonagall wore a look of chagrin upon her face. After a long day’s
shopping she hadn’t needed to ask Harry how much gold was left in the
bag after the salesman quoted his price, which meant the Professor could
do good mental arithmetic without pen and paper. Once again, Harry
reminded himself that scientiﬁcally illiterate was not at all the same thing
as stupid.
“I’m sorry, young man,” McGonagall said. “This is entirely my fault.
I would oﬀer to take you back to Gringotts, but the bank will be closed
for all but emergency services now.”
Harry took a deep breath. He needed to be a little angry for what
he wanted to try now, there was no way he’d have the courage to do it
otherwise. She didn’t listen to me, he thought to himself, I would have
taken more gold but she didn’t want to listen... He thought back to that
black rage of before, tried to call up a little of it. Visualized the person
he needed to be, and drew that personality over himself like a wizard’s
robes. Focusing his entire world on McGonagall and the need to bend
this conversation to his will, he spoke.
“Let me guess,” Harry said. “You thought you were leaving yourself
*

72

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

plenty of error margin, that one hundred Galleons would be more than
enough, and that’s why you didn’t bother warning me when it was down
to ninety-seven.”
McGonagall closed her eyes in resignation. “Yes.”
“I anticpated this, Professor McGonagall. I expected this to happen.
There are research studies showing that this is what happens when people think they’re leaving themselves plenty of error margin. If it were me,
I’d have taken two hundred Galleons just to be sure; there was plenty
of money in that vault, and I could have put back any extra later. But
I knew that you wouldn’t let me do it. I knew there wasn’t even any
point in asking. I knew you would be annoyed and maybe even angry if
I asked. Am I wrong?”
“No,” McGonagall said, “you’re right.” Her voice held a note of apology, and yet still a note of self-pride alongside that, as though Harry
ought to notice how very, very honored he was to have Professor McGonagall apologizing to him.
“You should understand, Professor McGonagall,” Harry spoke the
words very carefully, “this is why I don’t trust adults. You thought that
being adult meant it was your role to prevent me from taking too much
money out of my vault. Not that it was your role to make sure the job
got done no matter what.”
McGonagall’s eyes ﬂew open, and she gave Harry a hard look.
“Well, Professor McGonagall, if you had to do it all over again, and
I suggested taking out an extra hundred Galleons just to be sure, with
no justiﬁcation other than to be prepared, would you listen to me that
time?”
“I take your point,” McGonagall said. “You don’t need to lecture me,
young man!”
“Ah, but I haven’t gotten to my point. Do you know the diﬀerence
between someone worth talking to and a mere obstacle, Professor McGonagall? From my perspective, that is? If an adult thinks that being
superior to me, above me, getting obedience from me, is the most important thing to them, then they will be an obstacle. A potential collaborator
is someone who thinks that getting the job done is more important than
making sure I know my place. Allow me to show you something, Pro*

73

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

fessor McGonagall.”
The trunk salesman was watching them with undisguised fascination, as Harry took out the mokeskin pouch, and said, “Eleven loose
Galleons, please.”
And there was gold in Harry’s hand.
“Where did you get that—”
“From my vault, Professor McGonagall, when I fell into that pile of
gold. I shoved some money into my pocket and then held the bag of gold
against it, so jingles would seem to come from the right place. Since, you
understand, I expected from the beginning that this would happen.”
McGonagall’s mouth was wide, wide open.
“So now the question is... are you angry at me for defying your authority? Or glad that now our day ends in success instead of failure?
I’m not asking for anything else from you by asking this question. I am
neither promising nor demanding cooperation on future matters. I only
want to know if you’re a potential collaborator or an obstacle... Minerva.”
The salesman actually gasped out loud.
And the tall witch stood there, silent.
“Discipline at Hogwarts must be enforced,” she said after almost a
full minute. “For the sake of all the students. And that must include
courtesy and obedience from you to all professors.”
Harry inclined his head. “I understand. Professor McGonagall.”
Though it was amazing how, somehow, it seemed so much more important to enforce discipline when you were on top of the heap, and not
underneath... but Harry didn’t think it wise to press the point further.
“Then... I congratulate you on your preparedness.”
Harry wanted to cheer, or throw up, or faint, or something. That
was the ﬁrst time that speech had ever worked on an adult. That was
the ﬁrst time any of his speeches had ever worked on anyone. Maybe
because it was also the ﬁrst time he had something really serious that an
adult needed from him, but still—
Minerva McGonagall, +1 point.
Harry bowed, and gave the bag of gold and the extra eleven Galleons
into McGonagall’s hands. “I leave it to you, madam. For myself, I must
*

74

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

use the restroom. May I ask where—”
The salesman, unctuous once more, pointed toward a door set into
the wall with a gold-handled knob. As Harry started to walk away, he
heard from behind the salesman ask in his oily voice, “May I inquire as
to who that was, Madam McGonagall? I take it he is Slytherin—thirdyear, perhaps?—and from a prominent family, but I did not recognize—”
The slam of the bathroom door cut oﬀ his words, and after Harry
had identiﬁed the lock and pressed it into place, he collapsed against the
door. Harry’s entire body was sheathed in sweat that had soaked clear
through his Muggle clothing, though at least it didn’t show through the
robes. He bent down over the gold-etched ivory toilet, and retched a
few times, but thankfully nothing came up.

**
*
And they stood again in the courtyard of the Leaky Cauldron, the small,
leaf-dusted, deserted interface between magical Britain’s Diagon Alley
and the entire Muggle world. That was one awfully decoupled economy... Harry was to go to a payphone and call his father once he was
on the other side. He did not, apparently, need to worry about his luggage being stolen from him; it had the status of a major wizarding item,
something that most Muggles wouldn’t notice. That was part of what
you could get in the wizarding world, if you were willing to pay the
price of a used car. Harry wondered if his father would be able to see
the trunk after it was pointed out to him.
“So here we part ways, for a time,” Professor McGonagall said. She
shook her head in wonderment. “This has been the strangest day of my
life for... many a year. Since the day I learned that a child had defeated
You-Know-Who. I wonder now, in retrospect, if that was the last sane
day of the world.”
Oh, like she had anything to complain about. You think your day was
surreal? Try mine.
*

75

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIX

*
*

*

“I was very impressed with you today,” Harry said to her. “I should
have remembered to compliment you out loud, I was awarding you
points in my head and everything.”
“Thank you, Mr. Potter,” McGonagall said. “If you had already been
Sorted into a House I would have deducted so many points that their
grandchildren would still be losing the House Cup.”
“Thank you, Minerva.” It was probably too early to call her Minny.
This woman might well be the sanest adult Harry had ever met,
despite her lack of scientiﬁc background. Harry was even considering oﬀering her the number-two position in whatever group he formed
to ﬁght the Dark Lord, though he wasn’t silly enough to say that out
loud. Now what would be a good name for that...? The Death Eater
Eaters?
“I’ll see you again very soon, when school starts,” McGonagall said.
“And, Mr. Potter, about your wand—”
“I know what you’re going to ask,” Harry said. He took out his
precious wand and, with a deep twinge of inner pain, ﬂipped it over in
his hand. Handle out, he presented it to McGonagall. “Take it. I hadn’t
planned to do anything, not a single thing, but I don’t want you to have
nightmares about me blowing up my house.”
McGonagall shook her head rapidly. “Oh no, Mr. Potter! That isn’t
done. I was just going to warn you not to use your wand at home, since
there are ways of detecting underage magic and it is prohibited without
supervision.”
“Ah,” Harry said, and smiled. “That sounds like a very sensible rule.
I’m glad to see the wizarding world takes that sort of thing seriously.”
McGonagall peered hard at him. “You really mean that.”
“Yes,” Harry said. “I get it. Magic is dangerous and the rules are
there for good reasons. Certain other matters are also dangerous. I get
that too. Remember that I am not stupid.”
“I am unlikely ever to forget it. Thank you, Harry, that does make
me feel better about entrusting you with certain things. Goodbye for
now.”
Harry turned to go, into the Leaky Cauldron and out toward the
Muggle world.
*

76

*

**
*

THE PLANNING FALLACY

*
*

*

As his hand touched the back door’s handle, he heard a last whisper
from behind him.
“Hermione Granger.”
“What?” Harry said, his hand still on the door.
“Look for a ﬁrst-year girl named Hermione Granger on the train to
Hogwarts.”
“Who is she?”
There was no answer, and when Harry turned around, McGonagall
was gone.
Aftermath:
Headmaster Dumbledore leaned forward over his desk. His twinkling eyes peered out at McGonagall. “So, Minerva, how did you ﬁnd
Harry?”
McGonagall opened her mouth. Then she closed her mouth. Then
she opened her mouth again. No words came out.
“I see,” Dumbledore said gravely. “Thank you for your report, Minerva. You may go.”

*

77

*

CHAPTER

SE V EN

RECIPROCATION
“Your dad is almost as awesome as my dad.”

**
*
etunia Evans-Verres’s lips were trembling and her eyes were tearing
up as Harry hugged her midsection on Platform Nine of the King’s
Cross Station. “Are you sure you don’t want me to come with you,
Harry?”
Harry looked up at her. His eyes glanced over to his father Michael
Verres-Evans, who was looking stereotypically stern-but-proud, and
then back to his mother, who really did look rather... uncomposed.
“Mum, I know you don’t like the wizarding world very much. You
don’t have to come with. I mean it.”
Petunia winced. “Harry, you shouldn’t worry about me, I’m your
mother and if you need someone with you—”
“Mum, I’m going to be on my own at Hogwarts for months and
months. If I can’t manage a train platform alone, better to ﬁnd out sooner
rather than later so we can abort.” He lowered his voice to a whisper.
“Besides, Mum, they all love me over there. If I have any problems,
all I need to do is take oﬀ my headband,” Harry tapped the exercise
sweatband covering his scar, “and I’ll have way more help than I can
handle.”
“Oh, Harry,” Petunia whispered. She knelt down and hugged him
hard, face to face, their cheeks resting against each other. Harry could

P

*

79

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

feel her ragged breathing, and then he heard a sob escape her lips, choked
and muﬄed but there. “Oh, Harry, I do love you, always remember
that.”
It’s like she’s afraid she’ll never see me again, the thought suddenly
popped into Harry’s head. He knew the thought was true but he didn’t
know why Mum was so afraid.
So he made a guess. “Mum, you know that I’m not going to turn
into your sister just because I’m learning magic, right? I’ll do any magic
you ask for—if I can, I mean—or if you want me not to use any magic
around the house, I’ll do that too, I promise I’ll never let magic come
between us—”
A tight hug cut oﬀ his words. “You have a good heart,” his mother
whispered into his ear. “A very good heart, my son.”
Harry choked up himself a little, then.
His mother released him, and stood up. She took a handkerchief
out of her pocket and dabbed at her eyes and running makeup with a
trembling hand.
There were no questions about his father accompanying him to the
magical side of King’s Cross Station. Dad had trouble just looking at
Harry’s trunk directly. Magic ran in families, and Michael Verres-Evans
couldn’t even walk.
So instead his father just cleared his throat. “Good luck at school,
Harry,” he said. “Do you think I bought you enough books?”
Harry had explained to his father about how he thought this might
be his big chance to do something really revolutionary and important,
and Professor Verres-Evans had nodded and dumped his extremely busy
schedule for two solid days in order to go on the Greatest Used Bookstore Raid Ever, which had covered four cities and produced thirty boxes
of science books now sitting in the cavern level of Harry’s trunk. Most
of the books had gone for a pound or two, but some of them deﬁnitely
hadn’t, like the very latest Handbook of Chemistry and Physics or the complete 1972 set of the Encyclopaedia Britannica. His father had tried to
block Harry oﬀ from seeing the price registers but Harry ﬁgured his
father must have spent at least a thousand pounds. Harry had said to
his father that he would pay him back as soon as he ﬁgured out how to
*

80

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

convert wizarding gold into Muggle money, and his father had told him
to go jump in a lake.
And then his father had asked him: Do you think I bought you enough
books? It was very clear what answer Dad was looking for.
Harry’s throat was hoarse, for some reason. “You can never have
enough books,” he recited the Verres family motto, and his father knelt
down and gave him a quick, ﬁrm embrace. “But you certainly tried,”
Harry said, and felt himself choking up again. “It was a really, really,
really good try.”
His Dad straightened. “So...” he said. “Do you see a Platform Nine
and Three-Quarters?”
King’s Cross Station was huge and busy, the walls and ﬂoors paved
with ordinary dirt-stained tiles, full of ordinary people hurrying about
their ordinary business and having ordinary conversations that generated lots and lots of ordinary noise. King’s Cross Station had a Platform
Nine (which they were standing on) and a Platform Ten (right nearby)
but there was absolutely nothing between Platform Nine and Platform
Ten except a thin, unpromising barrier wall. A great skylight overhead
let in plenty of light to illuminate the total lack whatsoever of any Platform Nine and Three-Quarters.
Harry stared around until his eyes watered, thinking, come on, magesight, come on, mage-sight, but absolutely nothing appeared to him. He
thought about taking out his wand and waving it, but McGonagall had
warned him against using his wand. Plus if there was another shower
of blue-bronze sparks that might lead to being arrested for setting oﬀ
ﬁreworks inside a train station. And that was assuming his wand didn’t
decide to do something else, like blowing up all of King’s Cross. Harry
had only lightly skimmed his schoolbooks (though that skim was quite
bizarre enough) in a very quick eﬀort to determine what sort of science
books to buy over the next 48 hours.
Well, he had—Harry glanced at his watch—one whole hour to ﬁgure
it out, since he was supposed to be on the train at eleven. Maybe this
was the equivalent of an iq test and the dumb kids couldn’t become wizards. (And the amount of extra time you gave yourself would determine
your Conscientiousness, which was the second most important factor in
*

81

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

scholarly success.)
“I’ll ﬁgure it out,” Harry said to his waiting parents. “It’s probably
some sort of test thingy.”
His father frowned. “Hm... maybe look for a trail of mixed footprints on the ground, leading somewhere that doesn’t seem to make
sense—”
“Dad!” Harry said. “Stop that! I haven’t even tried to ﬁgure it out
on my own!” It was a very good suggestion, too, which was worse.
“Sorry,” his father apologized.
“Ah...” Harry’s mother said. “I don’t think they would do that to
a student, do you? Are you sure Professor McGonagall didn’t tell you
anything?”
“Maybe she was distracted,” Harry said without thinking about it.
“Harry!” hissed his father and mother in unison. “What did you do?”
“I, um—” Harry swallowed. “Look, we don’t have time for this
now—”
“Harry!”
“I mean it! We don’t have time for this now! Because it’s a really
long story and I’ve got to ﬁgure out how to get to school!”
His mother had a hand over her face. “How bad was it?”
“I, ah,” I can’t talk about that for reasons of National Security, “about
half as bad as the Incident with the Science Fair Project?”
“Harry!”
“I, er, oh look there are some people with an owl I’ll go ask them
how to get in!” and Harry ran away from his parents toward the family
of ﬁery redheads, his trunk automatically slithering behind him.
The plump woman looked up toward him as he arrived. “Hello,
dear. First time at Hogwarts? Ron’s new, too—” and then she froze. She
peered closely at him. “Harry Potter?”
Four boys and a red-headed girl and an owl all swung around and
then also froze in place.
“Oh, come on!” Harry protested. He’d been planning to go by
Mr. Verres at least until he got to Hogwarts. “I bought a headband and
everything! How come you know who I am?”
“Yes,” Harry’s father said, coming up behind him with long easy
*

82

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

strides, “how do you know who he is?” His voice indicated a certain
dread.
“Your picture was in the newspapers,” said one of two identicallooking twins.
“Harry!”
“Dad! It’s not like that! It’s ’cause I defeated the Dark Lord YouKnow-Who when I was one year old!”
“What?”
“Mum can explain.”
“What?”
“Ah... Michael dear, there are certain things I thought it would be
best not to bother you with until now—”
“Excuse me,” Harry said to the redheaded family who were all staring
at him, “but it would be quite extremely helpful if you could tell me how
to get to Platform Nine and Three Quarters right now.”
“Ahhh...” said the woman. She raised a hand and pointed at the wall
between platforms. “Just walk straight at the barrier between platforms
nine and ten. Don’t stop and don’t be scared you’ll crash into it, that’s
very important. Best do it at a bit of a run if you’re nervous.”
“And whatever you do, don’t think of an elephant.”
“George! Ignore him, Harry dear, there’s no reason not to think of
an elephant.”
“I’m Fred, Mum, not George—”
“Thanks!” Harry said and took oﬀ at a run toward the barrier—
Wait a minute, it wouldn’t work unless he believed in it?
It was at times like this that Harry hated his mind for actually working fast enough to realize that this was a case where “resonant doubt”
applied, that is, if he’d started out thinking that he would go through
the barrier he’d have been ﬁne, only now he was worried about whether
he suﬃciently believed he’d go through the barrier, which meant that he
actually was worried about crashing into it—
“Harry! Get back here, you have some explaining to do!” That was his
Dad.
Harry shut his eyes and ignored everything he knew about justiﬁed
belief and just tried to believe really hard that he’d go through the barrier
*

83

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

and—
—the sounds around him changed.
Harry opened his eyes and stumbled to a halt, feeling vaguely dirtied
by having made a deliberate eﬀort to believe something.
He was standing in a bright, open-air platform next to a single huge
train, fourteen long cars headed up by a massive scarlet-metal steam engine with a smokestack that promised death to air quality. The platform
was already lightly crowded (even though Harry was a full hour early)
and dozens of children and their parents were swarming around benches,
tables, and various hawkers and vendors.
It went completely without saying that there was no such place in
King’s Cross Station and no room to hide it.
Okay, so either (a) I just teleported somewhere else entirely (b) they can
fold space like no one’s business or (c) they are simply ignoring the rules.
There was a slithering sound behind him, and Harry turned to conﬁrm that his trunk had indeed followed him on its small clawed tentacles.
Apparently, for magical purposes, his luggage had also managed to believe with suﬃcient strength to pass through the barrier. Actually that
was quite disturbing when Harry started thinking about it.
A moment later, the youngest-looking red-haired boy came through
the iron archway (iron archway?) at a run, pulling his trunk behind
him on a leash and nearly crashing into Harry. Harry, feeling stupid
for having stayed around, quickly began moving away from the landing
area, and the red-haired boy followed him, yanking hard on his trunk’s
leash in order to keep up. A moment later, a white owl ﬂuttered through
the archway and came to rest on the boy’s shoulder.
“Cor,” said the red-haired boy, “are you really Harry Potter?”
Not this again. “I have no logical way of knowing that for certain. My
parents raised me to believe that I was Harry Potter, and many people
here have told me that I look like my parents, I mean my other parents,
but,” Harry frowned, realizing, “for all I know, there could easily be
spells to polymorph a child into a speciﬁed appearance—”
“Er, what, mate?”
Not headed for Ravenclaw, I take it. “Yes, I’m Harry Potter.”
“I’m Ron Weasley,” said the tall skinny freckled long-nosed kid, and
*

84

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

stuck out a hand, which Harry politely shook as they walked. The owl
gave Harry an oddly measured and courteous hoot (actually more of an
eehhhhh sound, which surprised Harry).
At this point Harry realized the potential for imminent catastrophe
and devised a way to prevent it. “Just a second,” he said to Ron, and
opened one of the drawers of his trunk, the one that if he recalled correctly was for Winter Clothes—it was—and then he found the lightest
scarf he owned, underneath his winter coat. Harry took oﬀ his headband, and just as quickly unfolded the scarf and tied it around his face.
It was a little hot, especially in the summer, but Harry could live with
that.
Then he shut that drawer (now containing his useless headband,
though it didn’t really belong there) and pulled out another drawer and
drew forth his black wizard robes, which he shrugged over his head now
that he was out of Muggle territory.
“There,” Harry said, satisﬁed. The sound came out only slightly
muﬄed through the scarf over his face. He turned to Ron. “How do I
look? Stupid, I know, but am I identiﬁable as Harry Potter?”
“Er,” Ron said. He closed his mouth, which had been open. “Not
really, Harry.”
“Very good,” Harry said. “However, so as not to obviate the point
of the whole exercise, you will henceforth address me as,” Verres might
not work anymore, “Mr. Spoo.”
“Okay, Harry,” Ron said uncertainly.
The Force is not particularly strong in this one. “Call... me... Mister...
Spoo.”
“Okay, Mister Spoo—” Ron stopped. “I can’t do that, it makes me
feel stupid.”
That’s not just a feeling. “Okay. You pick a name.”
“Mr. Cannon,” Ron said at once. “For the Chudley Cannons.”
“Ah...” Harry had a dire apprehension that he was going to terribly
regret asking this. “Who or what are the Chudley Cannons?”
“Who’re the Chudley Cannons? Only the most brilliant team in the
whole history of Quidditch! Sure, they ﬁnished at the bottom of the
league last year, but—”
*

85

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

“What’s Quidditch?”
Asking this was also a mistake.
“So let me get this straight,” Harry said as it seemed that Ron’s explanation (with associated hand gestures) was winding down. “Catching
the Snitch is worth one hundred and ﬁfty points?”
“Yeah—”
“How many ten-point goals does one side usually score not counting
the Snitch?”
“Um, maybe ﬁfteen or twenty in professional games—”
“That’s just wrong. That violates every possible rule of game design.
Look, the rest of this game sounds like it might make sense, sort of,
for a sport I mean, but you’re basically saying that catching the Snitch
overwhelms almost any ordinary point spread. The two Seekers are up
there ﬂying around looking for the Snitch and usually not interacting
with anyone else, spotting the Snitch ﬁrst is going to be mostly luck—”
“It’s not luck!” protested Ron. “You’ve got to keep your eyes moving
in the right pattern—”
“That’s not interactive, there’s no back-and-forth with the other
player and how much fun is it to watch someone incredibly good at
moving their eyes? And then whichever Seeker gets lucky swoops in
and grabs the Snitch and makes everyone else’s work moot. It’s like
someone took a real game and grafted on this pointless extra position
just so that you could be the Most Important Player without needing to
really get involved or learn the rest of it. Who was the ﬁrst Seeker, the
King’s idiot son who wanted to play Quidditch but couldn’t understand
the rules?” Actually, now that Harry thought about it, that seemed like
a surprisingly good hypothesis. Put him on a broomstick and tell him
to catch the shiny thing...
Ron’s face pulled into a scowl. “If you don’t like Quidditch, you
don’t have to make fun of it!”
“If you can’t criticize, you can’t optimize. I’m suggesting how to
improve the game. And it’s very simple. Get rid of the Snitch.”
“They won’t change the game just ’cause you say so!”
“I am the Boy-Who-Lived, you know. People will listen to me. And
maybe if I can persuade them to change the game at Hogwarts, the in*

86

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

novation will spread.”
A look of absolute horror was spreading over Ron’s face. “But, but,
but if you get rid of the Snitch, how will anyone know when the game
ends?”
“Buy... a... clock. It would be a lot fairer than having the game sometimes end after ten minutes and sometimes not end for hours, and the
schedule would be a lot more predictable for the spectators, too.” Harry
sighed. “Oh, stop giving me that look of absolute horror, I probably
won’t actually take the time to destroy this pathetic excuse for a national
sport and remake it stronger and smarter in my own image. I’ve got
way, way, way more important stuﬀ to worry about.” Harry looked
thoughtful. “Then again, it wouldn’t take much time to write up the
Ninety-Five Theses of the Snitchless Reformation and nail it to a church
door—”
“Potter,” drawled a young boy’s voice, “what is that on your face and
what is standing next to you?”
Ron’s look of horror was replaced by utter hatred. “You!”
Harry turned his head; and indeed it was Draco Malfoy, who might
have been forced to wear standard school robes, but was making up for
that with a trunk looking at least as magical and far more elegant than
Harry’s own, decorated in silver and emeralds and bearing what Harry
guessed to be the Malfoy family crest, a beautiful fanged serpent over
crossed ivory wands.
“Draco!” Harry said. “Er, or Malfoy if you prefer, though that kind
of sounds like Lucius to me. I’m glad to see you’re doing so well after,
um, our last meeting. This is Ron Weasley. And I’m trying to go incognito, so call me, eh,” Harry looked down at his robes, “Mister Black.”
“Harry!” hissed Ron. “You can’t use that name!”
Harry blinked. “Why not?” It sounded nicely dark, like an international man of mystery—
“I’d say it’s a ﬁne name,” said Draco, “but the Noble and Most Ancient House of Black might object. How about Mr. Silver?”
“You get away from... from Mr. Gold,” Ron said coldly, and took a
step forward. “He doesn’t need to talk to the likes of you!”
Harry raised a placating hand. “I’ll go by Mr. Bronze, thanks for the
*

87

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

naming schema. And, Ron, um,” Harry struggled to ﬁnd a way to say
this, “I’m glad you’re so... enthusiastic about protecting me, but I don’t
particularly mind talking to Draco—”
This was apparently the last straw for Ron, who spun on Harry with
eyes now aﬂame with outrage. “What? Do you know who this is?”
“Yes, Ron,” Harry said, “you may remember that I called him Draco
without him needing to introduce himself.”
Draco sniggered. Then his eyes lit on the white owl on Ron’s shoulder. “Oh, what’s this?” Draco said in a drawl rich with malice. “Where
is the famous Weasley family rat?”
“Buried in the backyard,” Ron said coldly.
“Aw, how sad. Pot... ah, Mr. Bronze, I should mention that the
Weasley family is widely agreed to have the best pet story ever. Want
to tell it, Weasley?”
Ron’s face contorted. “You wouldn’t think it was funny if it happened to your family!”
“Oh,” Draco purred, “but it wouldn’t ever happen to the Malfoys.”
Ron’s hands clenched into ﬁsts—
“That’s enough,” Harry said, putting as much quiet authority into
the voice as he could manage. It was clear that whatever this was, it was
a painful memory for the red-haired kid. “If Ron doesn’t want to talk
about it, he doesn’t have to talk about it, and I’d ask that you not talk
about it either.”
Draco turned a surprised look on Harry, and Ron nodded. “That’s
right, Harry! I mean Mr. Bronze! You see what kind of person he is?
Now tell him to go away!”
Harry counted to ten inside his head, which for him was a very quick
12345678910 —an odd habit left over from the age of ﬁve when his
mother had ﬁrst instructed him to do it, and Harry had reasoned that
his way was faster and ought to be just as eﬀective. “Ron,” Harry said
calmly, “I’m not telling him to go away. He’s welcome to talk to me if
he wants.”
“Well, I don’t intend to hang around with anyone who hangs around
with Draco Malfoy,” Ron announced coldly.
Harry shrugged. “That’s up to you. I don’t intend to let anyone say
*

88

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

who I can and can’t hang around with.” Silently chanting, please go away,
please go away...
Ron’s face went blank with surprise, like he’d actually expected that
line to work. Then Ron spun about, yanked his luggage’s leash and
stormed oﬀ down the platform.
“If you didn’t like him,” Draco said curiously, “why didn’t you just
walk away?”
“Um... his mother helped me ﬁgure out how to get to this platform
from the King’s Cross Station, so it was kind of hard to tell him to get
lost. And it’s not that I hate this Ron guy,” Harry said, “I just, just...”
Harry searched for words.
“Don’t see any reason for him to exist?” oﬀered Draco.
“Pretty much.”
“Anyway, Potter... if you really were raised by Muggles—” Draco
paused here, as if waiting for a denial, but Harry didn’t say anything “—
then you may not realize what it’s like to be famous. People are going
to want to take up all of your time. You have to learn to say no.”
Harry nodded, putting a thoughtful look on his face. “That sounds
like very good advice.”
“If you try to be nice to them, it just means that you end up spending
the most time around the most pushy ones. Decide who you want to
spend time with and tell everyone else to go away. People will judge you
by who they see you with, and you don’t want to be seen with the likes
of Ron Weasley.”
Harry nodded again. “If you don’t mind my asking, how did you
recognize me?”
“Mister Bronze,” Draco drawled, “I have met you, remember. I met
you very well indeed. I saw someone going around with a scarf wrapped
around his head, looking absolutely ridiculous. So I took a wild guess.”
Harry bowed his head, accepting the compliment. “I’m terribly sorry
about that,” Harry said. “Our ﬁrst meeting, I mean. I didn’t mean to
embarrass you in front of Lucius.”
Draco waved it oﬀ while giving Harry an odd look. “I just wish Father could have come in while you were ﬂattering me—” Draco laughed.
“But thank you for what you said to Father. If not for that, I might’ve
*

89

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

had a lot harder time explaining.”
Harry swept a deeper bow. “And thank you for reciprocating with
what you said to Professor McGonagall.”
“You’re welcome. Though one of the assistants must’ve sworn her
closest friend to absolute secrecy, because Father says there’re weird rumors going around, like you and I got in a ﬁght or something.”
“Ouch,” Harry said, wincing. “I’m really sorry—”
“No, we’re used to it, Merlin knows there’s lots of rumors about the
Malfoy family already.”
Harry nodded. “I’m glad to hear you’re not in trouble.”
Draco smiled. “Father has, um, a rather reﬁned sense of humor, but
he does understand making friends. He understands it very well. In fact
he made me repeat that before I went to bed every night for the last
month, ‘I will make friends at Hogwarts.’ When I explained everything
to him and he saw that’s what I was doing, he not only apologized to me
but bought me an ice-cream.”
Harry’s jaw dropped. “You managed to spin that into an ice-cream?”
Draco nodded, looking every bit as smug as the feat deserved. “Well,
father knew what I was doing, of course, but he’s the one who taught me
how to do it, and if I grin the right way while I’m doing it, that makes
it a father-son thing and then he has to buy me an ice-cream or I’ll give
him this sort of sad look, like I think I must have disappointed him.”
Harry eyed Draco calculatingly, sensing the presence of another master. “You’ve gotten lessons on how to manipulate people?”
“For as far back as I can remember,” Draco said proudly. “Father
bought me tutors.”
“Wow,” Harry said. Reading Robert Cialdini’s Inﬂuence: Science and
Practice probably didn’t stack up very high compared to that (though it
was still one heck of a book). “Your dad is almost as awesome as my
dad.”
Draco’s eyebrows rose loftily. “Oh? And what does your father do?”
“He buys me books.”
Draco considered this. “That doesn’t sound very impressive.”
“You had to be there. Anyway, I’m glad to hear all that. The way
Lucius was looking at you, I thought he was going to c-crucify you.”
*

90

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

“My father really loves me,” Draco said ﬁrmly. “He really wouldn’t
ever do that.”
“Um...” Harry said. He remembered the black-robed, white-haired
ﬁgure of perfection that had strolled into Madam Malkin’s, wielding that
beautiful, deadly silver-handled cane. It was just so hard to visualize that
perfect killer as a doting father. “Don’t take this the wrong way, but how
do you know that?”
“Huh?” It was clear that this was a question Draco did not commonly
ask himself.
“I ask the fundamental question of rationality: Why do you believe
what you believe? What do you think you know and how do you
think you know it? What have you seen which makes you think Lucius wouldn’t sacriﬁce you the same way he’d sacriﬁce any other piece
in his game?”
Draco shot Harry another odd look. “Just what do you know about
Father?”
“Um... seat on the Wizengamot, seat on Hogwarts’ Board of Governors, incredibly wealthy, has the ear of Minister Fudge, has the conﬁdence of Minister Fudge, probably has some highly embarrassing photos of Minister Fudge, most prominent blood purist now that the Dark
Lord’s gone, former inner-circle Death Eater who was found to have the
Dark Mark but got oﬀ by claiming to be under the Imperius curse, which
was ridiculously implausible and pretty much everyone knew it... evil
with a capital ‘E’ and a born killer... I think that’s it.”
Draco’s eyes had narrowed to slits. “McGonagall told you that, did
she.”
“No, she wouldn’t say anything to me about Lucius afterward, except
to stay away from him. So during the Incident at the Potions Shop, while
Professor McGonagall was busy talking to the shopkeeper and trying to
get everything under control, I grabbed one of the customers and asked
them about Lucius.”
Draco’s eyes were wide again. “Did you really?”
Harry gave Draco a puzzled look. “If I lied the ﬁrst time, I’m not
going to tell you the truth just because you ask twice.”
There was a certain pause as Draco absorbed this.
*

91

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

“You’re so completely going to be in Slytherin.”
“I’m so completely going to be in Ravenclaw, thank you very much.
I only want power so I can get books.”
Draco giggled. “Yeah, right. Anyway... to answer what you asked...”
Draco took a deep breath, and his face turned serious. “Father once
missed a Wizengamot vote for me. I was on a broom and I fell oﬀ and
broke a lot of ribs. It really hurt. I’d never hurt that much before and I
thought I was going to die. So Father missed this really important vote,
because he was there by my bed at St. Mungo’s, holding my hands and
promising me that I was going to be okay.”
Harry glanced away uncomfortably, then, with an eﬀort, forced himself to look back at Draco. “Why are you telling me that? It seems sort
of... private...”
Draco gave Harry a serious look. “One of my tutors once said that
people form close friendships by knowing private things about each
other, and the reason most people don’t make close friends is because
they’re too embarrassed to share anything really important about themselves.” Draco turned his palms out invitingly. “Your turn?”
Knowing that Draco’s hopeful face had probably been drilled into
him by months of practice did not make it any less eﬀective, Harry observed. Actually it did make it less eﬀective, but unfortunately not ineﬀective. The same could be said of Draco’s clever use of reciprocation
pressure for an unsolicited gift, a technique which Harry had read about
in his social psychology books (one experiment had shown that an unconditional gift of $5 was twice as eﬀective as a conditional oﬀer of $50
in getting people to ﬁll out surveys). Draco had made an unsolicited gift
of a conﬁdence, and now invited Harry to oﬀer a conﬁdence in return...
and the thing was, Harry did feel pressured. Refusal, Harry was certain,
would be met with a look of sad disappointment, and maybe a small
amount of contempt indicating that Harry had lost points.
“Draco,” Harry said, “just so you know, I recognize exactly what
you’re doing right now. My own books called it reciprocation and they
talk about how giving someone a straight gift of two Sickles was found
to be twice as eﬀective as oﬀering them twenty Sickles in getting them
to do what you want...” Harry trailed oﬀ.
*

92

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

Draco was looking sad and disappointed. “It’s not meant as a trick,
Harry. It’s a real way of becoming friends.”
Harry held up a hand. “I didn’t say I wasn’t going to respond. I just
need time to pick something that’s private but just as non-damaging.
Let’s say... I wanted you to know that I can’t be rushed into things.”
A pause to reﬂect could go a long way in defusing the power of a lot
of compliance techniques, once you learned to recognize them for what
they were.
“All right,” Draco said. “I’ll wait while you come up with something.
Oh, and please take oﬀ the scarf while you say it.”
Simple but eﬀective.
And Harry couldn’t help but notice how clumsy, awkward, graceless
his attempt at resisting manipulation / saving face / showing oﬀ had
appeared compared to Draco. I need those tutors.
“All right,” Harry said after a time. “Here’s mine.” He glanced
around and then rolled the scarf back up over his face, exposing everything but the scar. “Um... it sounds like you can really rely on your
father. I mean... if you talk to him seriously, he’ll always listen to you
and take you seriously.”
Draco nodded.
“Sometimes,” Harry said, and swallowed. This was surprisingly
hard, but then it was meant to be. “Sometimes I wish my own Dad
was like yours.” Harry’s eyes ﬂinched away from Draco’s face, more or
less automatically, and then Harry forced himself to look back at Draco.
Then it hit Harry what on Earth he’d just said, and Harry hastily
added, “Not that I wish my Dad was a ﬂawless instrument of death like
Lucius, I only mean taking me seriously—”
“I understand,” Draco said with a smile. “There... now doesn’t it feel
like we’re a little closer to being friends?”
Harry nodded. “Yeah. It does, actually. Um... no oﬀense, but I’m
going to put on my disguise again, I really don’t want to deal with—”
“I understand.”
Harry rolled the scarf back down over his face.
“My father takes all of his allies seriously,” Draco said. “That’s why
he has a lot of allies. Maybe you should meet him.”
*

93

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

“I’ll think about it,” Harry said in a neutral voice. He shook his head
in wonder. “So you really are his one weak point. Huh.”
Now Draco was giving Harry a really odd look. “You want to go get
something to drink and ﬁnd somewhere to sit down?”
Harry realized he had been standing in one place for too long, and
stretched himself, trying to crick his back. “Sure.”
The platform was starting to ﬁll up now, but there was still a quieter
area on the far side away from the red steam engine. Along the way
they passed a vendor, a bald but bearded man with a small cart oﬀering
newspapers and comic books and stacked neon-green cans.
The vendor was, in fact, leaning back and drinking out of one of
the neon-green cans at the exact point when he spotted the reﬁned and
elegant Draco Malfoy approaching along with a mysterious boy looking
incredibly stupid with a scarf tied over his face, causing the vendor to
experience a sudden coughing ﬁt in mid-drink and dribble a large amount
of neon-green liquid onto his beard.
“’Scuse me,” Harry said, “but what is that stuﬀ, exactly?”
“Comed-Tea,” said the vendor. “If you drink it, something surprising
is bound to happen which makes you spill it on yourself or someone else.
But it’s charmed to vanish just a few seconds later—” Indeed the stain on
his beard was already disappearing.
“How droll,” said Draco. “How very, very droll. Come, Mr. Bronze,
let’s go ﬁnd another—”
“Hold on,” Harry said.
“Oh come on! That’s just, just juvenile!”
“No, I’m sorry Draco, I have to investigate this. What happens if I
drink Comed-Tea while doing my best to keep the conversation completely serious?”
The vendor smiled and shrugged mysteriously. “Who knows? You
suddenly see a friend walking by in a frog costume? Something humorous and unexpected will happen one way or another—”
“No. I’m sorry. I just don’t believe it. That violates my muchabused suspension of disbelief on so many levels I don’t even have the
language to describe it. There is, there is just no way a bloody drink can
manipulate reality to produce comedy setups, or I’m going to give up and
*

94

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

retire to the Bahamas—”
Draco groaned. “Are we really going to do this?”
“You don’t have to drink it but I have to investigate. Have to. How
much?”
“Five Knuts the can,” the vendor said.
“Five Knuts? You can sell reality-manipulating soft drinks for ﬁve
Knuts the can?” Harry reached into his pouch, said “four Sickles, four
Knuts”, and slapped them down on the counter. “Two dozen cans
please.”
“I’ll also take one,” Draco sighed, and started to reach for his pockets.
Harry shook his head rapidly. “No, I’ve got this, doesn’t count as
a favor either, I want to see if it works for you too.” He tossed a can to
Draco and then started feeding his pouch, whose Widening Lip ate the
cans accompanied by small burping noises, which wasn’t exactly helping
to restore Harry’s faith that he would someday discover a reasonable
explanation for all this.
Twenty-two burps later, Harry had the last purchased can in his
hand. Draco was looking at him expectantly, and the two of them
popped the top at the same time.
Harry rolled up his scarf to expose his mouth, and they tilted their
heads back and drank the Comed-Tea. It somehow tasted bright green—
extra-ﬁzzy and limer than lime.
Nothing happened.
Harry looked at the vendor, who was watching them benevolently.
All right, if this guy just took advantage of a natural accident to sell
me twenty-four cans of green soda pop, I’m going to applaud his creative
entrepreneurial spirit and then kill him.
“It doesn’t always happen immediately,” the vendor said. “But it’s
guaranteed to happen once per can, or your money back.”
Harry took another long drink.
Once again, nothing happened.
Maybe I should just chug the whole thing as fast as possible... and hope
my stomach doesn’t explode from all the carbon dioxide, or that I don’t burp
while drinking it...
No, he could aﬀord to be a little patient. But honestly, Harry didn’t
*

95

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

see how this was going to work. You couldn’t go up to someone and
say “Now I’m going to surprise you” or “And now I’m going to tell you
the punchline of the joke, and it’ll be really funny.” It ruined the shock
value. In Harry’s state of mental preparedness, Lucius Malfoy could have
walked past in a ballerina outﬁt and it wouldn’t have gotten him to do
a proper spit-take. Just what sort of wacky shenanigan was the universe
supposed to cough up now?
“Anyway, let’s sit down,” Harry said. He prepared to swig another
drink and started toward the distant seating area, which put him at the
right angle to glance back and see the portion of the vendor’s newspaper
stand that was devoted to a newspaper called The Quibbler, which was
showing the following headline:

Boy-Who-Lived gets
Draco Malfoy pregnant

“Gah!” screamed Draco as bright green liquid sprayed all over him
from Harry’s direction. Draco turned toward Harry with ﬁre in his eyes
and grabbed his own can. “You son of a mudblood! Let’s see how you
like being spat upon!” Draco took a deliberate swig from the can just as
his own eyes caught sight of the headline.
In sheer reﬂex action, Harry tried to block his face as the spray of
liquid ﬂew in his direction. Unfortunately he blocked using the hand
containing the Comed-Tea, sending the rest of the green liquid to splash
out over his shoulder.
Harry stared at the can in his hand even as he went on choking and
spluttering and the green color started to vanish from Draco’s robes.
Then he looked up and stared at the newspaper headline.

Boy-Who-Lived gets
Draco Malfoy pregnant
*

96

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

Harry’s lips opened and said, “buh-bluh-buh-buh...”
Too many competing objections, that was the problem. Every time
Harry tried to say “But we’re only eleven!” the objection “But men can’t
get pregnant!” demanded ﬁrst priority and was then run over by “But
there’s nothing between us, really!”
Then Harry looked down at the can in his hand again.
He was feeling a deep-seated desire to run away screaming at the top
of his lungs until he ﬁnally dropped over from lack of oxygen, and the
only thing stopping him was that he had once read that outright panic
was the sign of a truly important scientiﬁc problem.
Harry snarled, threw the can violently into a nearby garbage can, and
stalked back over to the vendor. “One copy of The Quibbler, please.” He
paid over four more Knuts, retrieved another can of Comed-Tea from
his pouch, and then stalked over to the picnic area with Draco, who was
staring at his own soda can with an expression of frank admiration.
“I take it back,” Draco said, “that was pretty good.”
“Hey, Draco, you know what I bet is even better for becoming
friends than exchanging secrets? Committing murder.”
“I have a tutor who says that,” Draco allowed. He reached inside his
robes and scratched himself with an easy, natural motion. “Who’ve you
got in mind?”
Harry slammed The Quibbler down hard on the picnic table. “The
guy who came up with this headline.”
Draco groaned. “Not a guy. A girl. A ten-year-old girl, if you can
believe that. She went nuts after her mother died and her father, who
owns this newspaper, is convinced that she is a seer, so when he doesn’t
know what’s going on he asks Luna Lovegood and believes anything she
says.”
Not really thinking about it, Harry popped the top on his next can
of Comed-Tea and prepared to drink. “Are you kidding me? That’s
even worse than Muggle journalism, which I would have thought was
physically impossible.”
Draco snarled. “She has some sort of perverse obsession about the
Malfoys, too, and her father is politically opposed to us so he prints every
word. As soon as I’m old enough I’m going to rape her.”
*

97

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

Green liquid spurted out of Harry’s nostrils, soaking into the scarf
still covering that area. Comed-Tea and lungs did not mix, and Harry
spent the next few seconds frantically coughing.
Draco looked at him sharply. “Something wrong?”
It was at this point that Harry came to the sudden realization that (a)
the sounds coming from the rest of the train platform had turned into
more of a blurred white noise at around the same time Draco had reached
inside his robes, and (b) when he had discussed committing murder as a
bonding method, there had been exactly one person in the conversation
who’d thought they were both joking.
Right. Because he seemed like such a normal kid. And he is a normal
kid, he is just what you’d expect a baseline male child to be like if he were
raised by the Dark Lord’s most fearsome servant and/or doting father.
“Yes, well,” Harry coughed, oh god how was he going to get out of
this conversational wedge, “I was just surprised at how you were willing
to discuss it so openly, you didn’t seem worried about getting caught or
anything.”
Draco snorted. “Are you joking? Luna Lovegood’s word against
mine?”
Holy crap on a holy cracker. “There’s no such thing as magical truth
detection, I take it?” Or dna testing... yet.
Draco looked around. His eyes narrowed. “That’s right, you don’t
know anything. Look, I’ll explain things to you, I mean the way it really
works, just like you were already in Slytherin and asked me the same
question. But you’ve got to swear not to say anything about it.”
“I can talk about the subject matter, just not that you’re the one who
said it, right? I mean say another young Slytherin asks me the same
question someday.”
Draco paused. “Repeat that.”
Harry did so.
“Okay, that doesn’t sound like you’re planning to trick me, so sure.
Just keep in mind, I can always deny everything. Swear.”
“I swear,” Harry said.
“The courts use Veritaserum, but it’s a joke really, you just Obliviate
yourself before you testify and then claim the other person was Memory*

98

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

Charmed with a false memory. If you’ve got a Pensieve, and we do, you
can even get the memory back afterward. Now, ordinarily the courts
presume in favor of Obliviation having occurred rather than more complicated Memory Charms. But there’s a lot of discretion-of-the-court involved. And if I’m involved in something then it impinges on the honor
of a Noble House, so it goes to the Wizengamot, where Father has the
votes. After I’m found not guilty the Lovegood family has to pay reparations for tarnishing my honor. And they know from the start that’s
how it’ll go, so they’ll just keep their mouths shut.”
A cold chill was coming over Harry, a chill that came with instructions to keep his voice and face normal. Note to self: Overthrow government of magical Britain at earliest convenience.
Harry coughed again to clear his throat. “Draco, please please please
don’t take this the wrong way, my word is my bond, but like you said I
could be in Slytherin and I really want to ask for informational purposes,
so what would happen theoretically speaking if I did testify that I’d heard
you plan it?”
“Then if I was anyone other than a Malfoy, I’d be in trouble,” Draco
answered smugly. “Since I am a Malfoy... Father has the votes. And
afterward he’d crush you... well, I guess not easily, since you are the
Boy-Who-Lived, but Father is pretty good at that sort of thing.” Draco
frowned. “’Sides which, you were willing to talk about murdering her,
why weren’t you worried about me testifying if she turned up dead?
I’m not famous in my own right the same way you are but your, ah,
supporters are a lot less likely to stick with you if you do something that
looks bad. And murder with a dead body and everything is a lot more
serious than some little girl crying rape.”
When the conversation can’t go forward and can’t go back, zig it
sideways. “It’s a Muggle thing, in Muggle Britain there’s a hell of a political diﬀerence between getting away with murder and getting away with
raping a little girl.”
“Really? Weird. Why isn’t murder worse? So does that mean that if
you’re the one to rape her, that makes it really awesome for you? ’Cause
I’d gladly yield ﬁrst place to you if that’s true. Man, imagine Loony
Lovegood trying to claim that she was raped by Draco Malfoy and the
*

99

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

Boy-Who-Lived, not even Dumbledore would believe her.”
Thankfully Harry was not drinking Comed-Tea at this point. How,
oh how did my day go this wrong? Harry’s mind calculated desperately
and came up with another zig.
“Actually, I’d as soon have you hold oﬀ on that for a while. After
I found out that headline came from a girl a year younger than me, I
wasn’t exactly thinking of murder or rape.”
“Huh? Do tell,” Draco said, and started to take another swig of his
Comed-Tea.
Harry didn’t know if the enchantment worked more than once per
can, but he did know he could avoid the blame, so he was careful to time
it exactly right:
“I was thinking someday I’m going to marry that woman.”
Draco made a horrid ker-splutching sound and leaked green ﬂuid out
the corners of his mouth like a broken car radiator. “Are you nuts?”
“Quite the opposite, I’m so sane it burns like ice.”
Draco giggled, a youthful high-pitched sound. “You’ve got weirder
tastes than a Lestrange. But you could just rape her anyway. The slut
probably likes it and I hear a lot of marriages get started like that. And
if not you could just Obliviate her and do it again next week.”
I am going to tear apart your pathetic little magical remnant of the Dark
Ages into pieces smaller than its constituent atoms. “Would you mind letting me worry about that? If you really were serious about wanting to
rape her I can owe you a favor—”
Draco waved it oﬀ. “Nah, this one’s free, there’s plenty of girls out
there who deserve it.”
Harry stared down at the can in his hand, the coldness settling into
his blood. Charming, happy, generous with his favors to his friends,
Draco wasn’t a psychopath. That was the sad and awful part, knowing human psychology well enough to know that Draco wasn’t a monster. There had been ten thousand societies over the history of the world
where this conversation could have happened. No, the world would have
been a very diﬀerent place indeed, if it took an evil mutant to say what
Draco had said. It was very simple, very human, it was the default if
nothing else intervened. To Draco, his enemies weren’t people.
*

100 *

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

And in the slowed time of this slowed country, here and now as in the
darkness-before-dawn prior to the Age of Reason, the son of a suﬃciently
powerful noble would simply take for granted that he was above the law.
At least when it came to a little rape here and there.
There were places in Muggle-land where it was still the same way,
countries where that sort of nobility still existed and still thought like
that, or even grimmer lands where it wasn’t just the nobility. It was
like that in every place and time that didn’t descend directly from the
Enlightenment. A line of descent, it seemed, which didn’t quite include
magical Britain, for all that there had been cross-cultural contamination
of things like pop-top soda cans.
And if Draco doesn’t change his mind about wanting revenge, and I
don’t throw away my own chance at happiness in life to marry some poor
crazy girl, then all I’ve just bought is time, and not too much of it...
For one girl. Not for others.
I wonder how diﬃcult it would be to just make a list of all the top blood
purists and kill them.
They’d tried exactly that during the French Revolution, more or
less—make a list of all the enemies of Progress and remove everything
above the neck—and it hadn’t worked out too well from what Harry
recalled. Maybe he needed to dust oﬀ some of those history books his
father had bought him, and see if what had gone wrong with the French
Revolution was something easy to ﬁx.
Harry gazed up at the sky, and at the pale shape of the Moon, visible
this morning through the cloudless air.
So the world is broken and ﬂawed and insane and cruel and bloody and
dark. This is news? You always knew that, anyway...
“You’re looking all serious,” Draco said. “Let me guess, your Muggle
parents told you that this sort of thing was bad.”
Harry nodded, not quite trusting his voice.
“Well, like Father says, there may be four houses, but in the end
everyone belongs to either Slytherin or Huﬄepuﬀ. And frankly, you’re
not on the Huﬄepuﬀ end. If you decide to side with the Malfoys under
the table... our power and your reputation... you could get away with
things that even I can’t do. Want to try it for a while? See what it’s
*

101

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

like?”
Aren’t we a clever little serpent. Eleven years old and already coaxing
your prey from hiding. Is it too late to save you, Draco?
Harry thought, considered, chose his weapon. “Draco, you want to
explain the whole blood purity thing to me? I’m sort of new.”
A wide smile crossed Draco’s face. “You really should meet Father
and ask him, you know, he’s our leader.”
“Give me the elevator pitch. Thirty-second version, I mean.”
“Okay,” Draco said. He drew in a deep breath, and his voice grew
slightly lower, and took on a cadence. “Our powers have been growing
weaker, generation by generation, as the mudblood taint grows. Where
Salazar and Godric and Rowena and Helga once raised Hogwarts by
their power, creating the Locket and the Sword and the Diadem and the
Cup and the Hat, no modern wizard has risen to challenge them. We
are fading, all fading into Muggles as we interbreed with their spawn and
allow our Squibs to live. If the taint is not checked, soon our wands
will break and all our arts cease, the line of Merlin will end and the
blood of Atlantis fail. Our children will be left scratching at the dirt
to survive like the mere Muggles, and darkness will cover all the world
for ever.” Draco took another swig from his soda can, looking satisﬁed.
That seemed to be the whole argument as far as Draco was concerned.
“Persuasive,” Harry said, meaning it descriptively rather than normatively. Classic, classic pattern. The Fall from Grace, the need to guard
what purity remained against contamination, the past sloping upward
and the future sloping only downward. And that pattern also had its
counter... “I have to correct you on one point of fact, though. Your
information about the Muggles is a bit out of date. We aren’t exactly
scratching at the dirt anymore.”
Draco’s head snapped around. “What? What do you mean, we?”
“We. The scientists. The line of Francis Bacon and the blood of the
Enlightenment. Muggles didn’t just sit around crying about not having
wands, we have our own powers now, with or without magic. If all your
powers fail then we will all have lost something very precious, because
your magic is the only hint we have as to how the universe must really
work—but you won’t be left scratching at the ground. Your houses will
*

102

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

still be cool in summer and warm in winter, there will still be doctors
and medicine. Science can keep you alive if magic fails. It would be a
tragedy and we should all want to prevent that, but it wouldn’t literally
be the end of all the light in the world. Just saying.”
Draco had backed up several feet and his face was full of mixed fear
and disbelief. “What in the name of Merlin are you talking about, Potter?”
“Hey, I listened to your story, won’t you listen to mine?” Clumsy,
Harry chided himself, but Draco actually did stop backing oﬀ and seem
to listen.
“Anyway,” Harry said, “I’m saying that you don’t seem to have been
paying much attention to what goes on in the Muggle world.” Probably
because the whole wizarding world seemed to regard the rest of Earth as
a slum, deserving around as much news coverage as the Financial Times
awarded to the routine miseries of Burundi. “All right. Quick check.
Have wizards ever been to the Moon? You know, that thing?” Harry
pointed up to that huge and distant globe.
“What?” Draco said. It was pretty clear the thought had never occured to the boy. “Go to the—it’s just a—” His ﬁnger pointed at the
little pale thingy in the sky. “You can’t Apparate to somewhere you’ve
never been and how would anyone get to the Moon in the ﬁrst place?”
“Hold on,” Harry said to Draco, “I’d like to show you a book I
brought with me, I think I remember what box it’s in.” And Harry
stood up and kneeled down and yanked out the stairs to the cavern level
of his trunk, then tore down the stairs and heaved a box oﬀ another
box, coming perilously close to treating his books with disrespect, and
snatched oﬀ the box cover and quickly but carefully pried out a stack of
books—
(Harry had inherited the nigh-magical Verres ability to remember
where all his books were, even after seeing them just once, which was
rather mysterious considering the lack of any genetic connection.)
And Harry raced back up the stairs and shoved the staircase back
into the trunk with his heel, and, panting, turned the pages of the book
until he found the picture he wanted to show to Draco.
The one with the white, dry, cratered land, and the suited people,
and the blue-white globe hanging over it all.
*

103 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

That picture.
The picture, if only one picture in all the world were to survive.
“That,” Harry said, his voice trembling because he couldn’t quite
keep the pride out, “is what the Earth looks like from the Moon.”
Draco slowly leaned over. There was a strange expression on his
young face. “If that’s a real picture, why isn’t it moving?”
Moving? Oh. “Muggles can do moving pictures but they need a
bigger box to show it, they can’t ﬁt them onto single book pages yet.”
Draco’s ﬁnger moved to one of the suits. “What are those?” His voice
starting to waver.
“Those are human beings. They are wearing suits that cover their
whole bodies to give them air, because there is no air on the Moon.”
“That’s impossible,” Draco whispered. There was terror in his eyes,
and utter confusion. “No Muggle could ever do that. How...”
Harry took back the book, ﬂipped the pages until he found what he
saw. “This is a rocket going up. The ﬁre pushes it higher and higher,
until it gets to the Moon.” Flipped pages again. “This is a rocket on the
ground. That tiny speck next to it is a person.” Draco gasped. “Going
to the Moon cost the equivalent of... probably around two thousand
million Galleons.” Draco choked. “And it took the eﬀorts of... probably
more people than live in all of magical Britain.” And when they arrived,
they left a plaque that said, ‘We came in peace, for all mankind.’ You are not
yet ready to hear those words, Draco, but I hope you will be, someday...
“You’re telling the truth,” Draco said slowly. “You wouldn’t fake a
whole book just for this—and I can hear it in your voice. But... but...”
“How, without wands or magic? It’s a long story, Draco. Science
doesn’t work by waving wands and chanting spells, it works by knowing
how the universe works on such a deep level that you know exactly what
to do in order to make the universe do what you want. If magic is like
casting an Imperius on someone to make them do what you want, then
science is like knowing them so well that you know exactly what to
say in order to make them think it was their own idea all along. It’s a
lot more diﬃcult than waving a wand, but it works when wands fail,
just like if the Imperius failed you could still try persuading a person.
And Science builds from generation to generation. You have to really
*

104

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

know what you’re doing to do science—and when you really understand
something, you can explain it to someone else. The greatest scientists of
one century ago, the brightest names that are still spoken with reverence,
their powers are as nothing to the greatest scientists of today. There is no
equivalent in science of your lost arts that raised Hogwarts. In science
our powers wax by the year. And we are beginning to understand and
unravel the secrets of life and inheritance. We’ll be able to look at the
very blood of which you spoke, and see what makes you a wizard, and
in one or two more generations, we’ll be able to persuade that blood to
make all your children powerful wizards too. So you see, your problem
isn’t nearly as bad as it looks, because in a few more decades, science will
be able to solve it for you.”
“But...” Draco said. His voice was trembling. “If Muggles have that
kind of power... then... what are we?”
“No, Draco, that’s not it, don’t you see? Science taps the power of
human understanding to look at the world and ﬁgure out how it works.
It can’t fail without humanity itself failing. Your magic could turn oﬀ,
and you would hate that, but you would still be you. You would still be
alive to regret it. But because science rests upon my human intelligence,
it is the power that cannot be removed from me without removing me.
Even if the laws of the universe change on me, so that all my knowledge
is void, I’ll just ﬁgure out the new laws, as has been done before. It’s not
a Muggle thing, it’s a human thing, it just reﬁnes and trains the power
you use every time you look at something you don’t understand and ask
‘Why?’ You’re of Slytherin, Draco, don’t you see the implication?”
Draco looked up from the book to Harry. His face showed dawning
understanding. “Wizards can learn to use this power.”
Very carefully, now... the bait is set, now the hook... “If you can
learn to think of yourself as a human instead of a wizard then you can
train and reﬁne your powers as a human.”
And if that instruction wasn’t in every science curriculum, Draco
didn’t need to know it, did he?
Draco’s eyes were deeply thoughtful. “You’ve... already done this?”
“To some extent,” Harry allowed. “My training isn’t complete. Not
at eleven. But—my father also bought me tutors, you see.” Sure, they’d
*

105

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

been starving grad students, and it had all been because Harry slept
on a 26-hour cycle—what was Professor McGonagall going to do about
that?—but leave all that aside for now...
Slowly, Draco nodded. “You think you can master both arts, add the
powers together, and...” Draco stared at Harry. “Make yourself lord of
the two worlds?”
Harry gave an evil laugh, it just seemed to come naturally at that
point. “You have to realize, Draco, that the whole world you know, all
of magical Britain, is just one square on a much larger gameboard. The
gameboard that includes places like the Moon, and the stars in the night
sky, which are lights just like the Sun only unimaginably far away, and
things like galaxies that are vastly huger than the Earth and Sun, things
so large that only scientists can see them and you don’t even know they
exist. But I really am Ravenclaw, you know, not Slytherin. I don’t want
to rule the universe. I just think it could be more sensibly organized.”
There was awe on Draco’s face. “Why are you telling me this?”
“Oh... there aren’t many people who know how to do true science—
understanding something for the very ﬁrst time, even if it confuses the
hell out of you. Help would be helpful.”
Draco stared at Harry with his mouth open.
“But make no mistake, Draco, true science really isn’t like magic,
you can’t just do it and walk away unchanged like learning how to say
the words of a new spell. The power comes with a cost, a cost so high
that most people refuse to pay it.”
Draco nodded at this as though, ﬁnally, he’d heard something he
could understand. “And that cost?”
“Learning to admit you’re wrong.”
“Um,” Draco said after the dramatic pause had stretched on for a
while. “You going to explain that?”
“Trying to ﬁgure out how something works on that deep level, the
ﬁrst ninety-nine explanations you come up with are wrong. The hundredth is right. So you have to learn how to admit you’re wrong, over
and over and over again. It doesn’t sound like much, but it’s so hard that
most people can’t do true science. Always questioning yourself, always
taking another look at things you’ve always taken for granted,” like hav*

106

*

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

ing a Snitch in Quidditch, “and every time you change your mind, you
change yourself. But I’m getting way ahead of myself here. Way ahead
of myself. I just want you to know... I’m oﬀering to share some of my
knowledge. If you want. There’s just one condition.”
“Uh huh,” Draco said. “You know, Father says that when someone
says that to you, it is never, ever a good sign.”
Harry nodded. “Now, don’t mistake me and think that I’m trying to
drive a wedge between you and your father. It’s not about that. It’s just
about me wanting to deal with someone my own age, rather than having
this be between me and Lucius. I think your father would be okay with
that too, he knows you have to grow up sometime. But your moves in
our game have to be your own. That’s my condition—that I’m dealing
with you, Draco, not your father.”
“Enough,” Draco said. He stood up. “Way too much. I have to go
oﬀ and think about this. Not to mention it’s about time to board the
train.”
“Take your time,” Harry said. “Just remember it’s not an exclusive
oﬀer, even if you take me up on it. True science does sometimes take
more than one person.”
The sounds of the train platform changed from blurs into murmurs
as Draco wandered oﬀ.
Harry looked at the watch on his wrist, a very simple mechanical
model that his father had bought him in the hopes it would go on working in the presence of magic. It was still ticking and if the time was
right, then it wasn’t quite eleven just yet. He probably ought to get on
the train soon and start looking for whatsherface, but it seemed worth
taking a few minutes ﬁrst to do some breathing exercises and see if his
blood warmed up again.
But when Harry looked up from his watch, he saw two ﬁgures approaching, looking utterly ridiculous with their faces cloaked by winter
scarves.
“Hello, Mr. Bronze,” said one of the masked ﬁgures. “Can we interest
you in joining the Order of Chaos?”

*

107

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V EN

*
*

*

Aftermath:
Not too long after that, when all that day’s fuss had ﬁnally subsided, Draco was bent over a desk with quill in hand. He had a private room in the Slytherin dungeons, with its own desk and its own
ﬁre—sadly not even he rated a connection to the Floo system, but at
least Slytherin didn’t buy into that utter nonsense about making everyone sleep in dorms. There weren’t many private rooms, you had to be
the very best within the House of the better sort, but that could be taken
for granted with the House of Malfoy.
Dear Father, Draco wrote.
And then he stopped.
Ink slowly dripped from his quill, staining the parchment near the
words.
Draco wasn’t stupid. He was young, but his tutors had trained him
to know certain things just by pattern recognition. Draco knew that
Potter probably felt a lot more sympathy toward Dumbledore’s faction
than Potter was letting on... though Draco did think Potter could be
tempted. But it was crystal clear that Potter was trying to tempt Draco
just as Draco was trying to tempt him.
And it was also clear that Potter was brilliant, and a whole lot more
than just slightly mad, and playing a vast game that Potter himself mostly
didn’t understand, improvised at top speed with the subtlety of a rampaging nundu. But Potter had managed to choose a tactic that Draco
couldn’t just walk away from. He had oﬀered Draco a part of his own
power, gambling that Draco couldn’t use it without becoming more
like him. His father had called this a very advanced technique, and had
warned Draco that it often didn’t work.
Draco knew he hadn’t understood everything that had happened...
but Potter had oﬀered him the chance to play and right now it was his.
And if he blurted the whole thing out, it would become his father’s.
In the end it was as simple as that. The lesser techniques require the
unawareness of the target, or at least their uncertainty. Flattery has to be
plausibly disguised as admiration. (“You should have been in Slytherin”
is an old classic, very eﬀective on a certain type of person who isn’t
*

108 *

**
*

RECIPROCATION

*
*

*

expecting it, and if it works you can repeat it.) But when you ﬁnd someone’s ultimate lever it doesn’t matter if they know you know. Potter,
in his mad rush, had guessed a key to Draco’s soul. And if Draco knew
that Potter knew it—even if it had been an obvious sort of guess—that
didn’t change anything.
So now, for the ﬁrst time in his life, he had real secrets to keep. He
was playing his own game. There was an obscure pain to it, but he knew
that Father would be proud, and that made it all right.
Leaving the ink drippings in place—there was a message there, and
one that his father would understand, for they had played the game of
subtleties more than once—Draco wrote out the one question that really
had gnawed at him about the whole aﬀair, the part that it seemed he ought
to understand, but he didn’t, not at all.
Dear Father:
Suppose I told you that I met a student at Hogwarts, not already
part of our circle of acquaintances, who called you a ‘ﬂawless instrument of death’ and said that I was your ‘one weak point’. What
would you say about him?
It didn’t take very long after that for an owl to bring Draco the reply.
My beloved son:
I would say that you had been so fortunate as to meet someone
who enjoys the intimate conﬁdence of our friend and valuable ally,
Severus Snape.
Draco stared at the letter for a while, and ﬁnally threw it into the
ﬁre.

*

109 *

CHAPTER

EIGHT

POSITI V E BIA S
“Allow me to warn you that challenging my ingenuity is a dangerous sort of project, and
may tend to make your life a lot more surreal.”

**
*
o one had asked for help, that was the problem. They’d just gone
around talking, eating, or staring into the air while their parents
gossiped. For whatever odd reason, no one had been sitting down reading a book, which meant she couldn’t just sit down next to them and
take out her own book. And even when she’d boldly taken the initiative by sitting down and continuing her third read-through of Hogwarts:
A History, no one had seemed inclined to sit down next to her.
Aside from helping people with their homework, or anything else
they needed, she really didn’t know how to meet people. She didn’t feel
like she was a shy person. She thought of herself as a take-charge sort of
girl. And yet, somehow, if there wasn’t some request along the lines of “I
can’t remember how to do long division” then it was just too awkward
to go up to someone and say... what? She’d never been able to ﬁgure out
what. And there didn’t seem to be a standard information sheet, which
was ridiculous. The whole business of meeting people had never seemed
sensible to her. Why did she have to take all the responsibility herself
when there were two people involved? Why didn’t adults ever help? She
wished some other girl would just walk up to her and say, “Hermione,
the teacher told me to be friends with you.”

N

*

111

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT

*
*

*

But let it be quite clear that Hermione Granger, sitting alone on the
ﬁrst day of school in one of the few cabins that had been empty, in the
last car of the train, with the cabin door left open just in case anyone for
any reason wanted to talk to her, was not sad, lonely, gloomy, depressed,
despairing, or obsessing about her problems. She was, rather, rereading
Hogwarts: A History for the third time and quite enjoying it, with only
a faint tinge of annoyance in the back of her mind at the general unreasonableness of the world.
There was the sound of an inter-train door opening, and then footsteps and an odd slithering sound coming down the hallway of the train.
Hermione laid aside Hogwarts: A History and stood up and stuck her
head outside—just in case someone needed help—and saw a young boy in
a wizard’s dress robes, probably ﬁrst or second year going by his height,
and looking quite silly with a scarf wrapped around his head. A small
trunk stood on the ﬂoor next to him. Even as she saw him, he knocked
on the door of another, closed cabin, and he said in a voice only slightly
muﬄed by the scarf, “Excuse me, can I ask a quick question?”
She didn’t hear the answer from inside the cabin, but after the boy
opened the door, she did think she heard him say—unless she’d somehow
misheard—“Does anyone here know the six quarks or where I can ﬁnd
a ﬁrst-year girl named Hermione Granger?”
After the boy had closed that cabin door, Hermione said, “Can I help
you with something?”
The scarfed face turned to look at her, and the voice said, “Not unless
you can name the six quarks or tell me where to ﬁnd a ﬁrst-year girl
named Hermione Granger.”
“Up, down, strange, charm, truth, beauty, and why are you looking
for a ﬁrst-year girl named Hermione Granger?”
It was hard to tell from this distance, but she thought she saw the
boy grin widely under his scarf. “Ah, so you’re a ﬁrst-year girl named
Hermione Granger,” said that young, muﬄed voice. “On the train to
Hogwarts, no less.” The boy started to walk toward her and her cabin,
and his trunk slithered along after him. “Technically, all I needed to
do was look for you, but it seems likely that I’m meant to talk to you
or invite you to join my party or get a key magical item from you or
*

112

*

**
*

POSITI V E BIA S

*
*

*

ﬁnd out that Hogwarts was built over the ruins of an ancient temple or
something. pc or npc, that is the question?”
Hermione opened her mouth to reply to this, but then she couldn’t
think of any possible reply to... whatever it was she’d just heard, even
as the boy walked over to her, looked inside the cabin, nodded with
satisfaction, and sat down on the empty bench across from her own,
which still had the book. His trunk scurried in after him, grew to three
times its former diameter and snuggled up next to her own in an oddly
disturbing fashion.
“Please, have a seat,” said the boy, “and do please close the door behind you, if you would. Don’t worry, I don’t bite anyone who doesn’t
bite me ﬁrst.” He was already unwinding the scarf from around his head.
The imputation that this boy thought she was scared of him was
enough to make her hand send the door sliding shut, jamming it into
the wall with unnecessary force. She spun around and saw a young face
with bright, laughing green eyes, and an angry red-dark scar set into his
forehead that reminded her of something in the back of her mind but
right now she had more important things to think about. “I didn’t say I
was Hermione Granger!”
“I didn’t say you said you were Hermione Granger, I just said you
were Hermione Granger. If you’re asking how I know, it’s because
I know everything. Good evening ladies and gentlemen, my name is
Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres or Harry Potter for short, I know that
probably doesn’t mean anything to you for a change—”
Hermione’s mind ﬁnally made the connection. The scar on his forehead, the shape of a lightning bolt. “Harry Potter! You’re in Modern
Magical History and The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts and Great Wizarding Events of the Twentieth Century.” It was actually the very ﬁrst time
in her whole entire life that she’d met someone from inside a book, and
it was a rather odd feeling.
The boy blinked three times. “I’m in books? Wait, of course I’m in
books... what a strange thought.”
“Goodness, didn’t you know?” said Hermione. “I’d have found out
everything I could if it was me.”
The boy spoke rather dryly. “Miss Hermione Granger, it has been
*

113

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT

*
*

*

less than 72 hours since I went to Diagon Alley and discovered my claim
to fame. I have spent the last two days buying science books. Believe me,
I intend to ﬁnd out everything I can.” The boy hesitated. “What do the
books say about me?”
Hermione Granger’s mind ﬂashed back, she hadn’t realized she
would be tested on those books so she’d read them only once, but it
was just a month ago so the material was still fresh in her mind. “You’re
the only one who’s survived the Killing Curse so you’re called the BoyWho-Lived. You were born to James Potter and Lily Potter formerly
Lily Evans on July 31st 1980. On October 31st 1981 the Dark Lord HeWho-Must-Not-Be-Named though I don’t know why not attacked your
home, whose location was betrayed by Sirius Black though it doesn’t
say how they knew it was him. You were found alive with the scar on
your forehead in the ruins of your parents’ house near the burnt remains
of You-Know-Who’s body. Chief Warlock Albus Percival Wulfric Brian
Dumbledore sent you oﬀ somewhere, no one knows where. The Rise and
Fall of the Dark Arts claims that you survived because of your mother’s
love and that your scar contains all of the Dark Lord’s magical power and
that the centaurs fear you, but Great Wizarding Events of the Twentieth
Century doesn’t mention anything like that and Modern Magical History
warns that there are lots of crackpot theories about you.”
The boy’s mouth was hanging open. “Were you told to wait for
Harry Potter on the train to Hogwarts, or something like that?”
“No,” Hermione said. “Who told you about me?”
“Professor McGonagall and I believe I see why. Do you have an eidetic memory, Hermione?”
Hermione shook her head. “It’s not photographic, I’ve always
wished it was but I had to read my school books ﬁve times over to memorize them all.”
“Really,” the boy said in a slightly strangled voice. “I hope you don’t
mind if I test that—it’s not that I don’t believe you, but as the saying
goes, ‘Trust, but verify’. No point in wondering when I can just do the
experiment.”
Hermione smiled, rather smugly. She so loved tests. “Go ahead.”
The boy stuck a hand into a pouch at his side and said “Magical Drafts
*

114

*

**
*

POSITI V E BIA S

*
*

*

and Potions by Arsenius Jigger”. When he withdrew his hand it was
holding the book he’d named.
Instantly Hermione wanted one of those pouches more than she’d
ever wanted anything.
The boy opened the book to somewhere in the middle and looked
down. “If you were making oil of sharpness—”
“I can see that page from here, you know!”
The boy tilted the book so that she couldn’t see it any more, and
ﬂipped the pages again. “If you were brewing a potion of spider climbing,
what would be the next ingredient you added after the Acromantula
silk?”
“After dropping in the silk, wait until the potion has turned exactly
the shade of the cloudless dawn sky, 8 degrees from the horizon and 8
minutes before the tip of the sun ﬁrst becomes visible. Stir eight times
counterclockwise and once clockwise, and then add eight drams of unicorn boogers.”
The boy shut the book with a sharp snap and put the book back
into his pouch, which swallowed it with a small burping noise. “Well
well well well well well. I should like to make you a proposition, Miss
Granger.”
“A proposition?” Hermione said suspiciously. Girls weren’t supposed to listen to those.
It was also at this point that Hermione realized the other thing—well,
one of the things—which was odd about the boy. Apparently people
who were in books actually sounded like a book when they talked. This
was quite the surprising discovery.
The boy reached into his pouch and said, “can of soda”, retrieving a
bright green cylinder. He held it out to her and said, “Can I oﬀer you
something to drink?”
Hermione politely accepted the soda. In fact she was feeling sort of
thirsty by now. “Thank you very much,” Hermione said as she popped
the top. “Was that your proposition?”
The boy coughed. “No,” he said. Just as Hermione started to drink,
he said, “I’d like you to help me take over the universe.”
Hermione ﬁnished her drink and lowered the soda. “No thank you,
*

115

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT

*
*

*

I’m not evil.”
The boy looked at her in surprise, as though he’d been expecting
some other answer. “Well, I was speaking a bit rhetorically,” he said.
“In the sense of the Baconian project, you know, not political power.
‘The eﬀecting of all things possible’ and so on. I want to conduct experimental studies of spells, ﬁgure out the underlying laws, bring magic into
the domain of science, merge the wizarding and Muggle worlds, raise the
entire planet’s standard of living, move humanity centuries ahead, discover the secret of immortality, colonize the Solar System, explore the
galaxy, and most importantly, ﬁgure out what the heck is really going
on here because all of this is blatantly impossible.”
That sounded a bit more interesting. “And?”
The boy stared at her incredulously. “And? That’s not enough?”
“And what do you want from me?” said Hermione.
“I want you to help me do the research, of course. With your encyclopedic memory added to my intelligence and rationality, we’ll have
the Baconian project ﬁnished in no time, where by ‘no time’ I mean
probably at least thirty-ﬁve years.”
Hermione was beginning to ﬁnd this boy annoying. “I haven’t seen
you do anything intelligent. Maybe I’ll let you help me with my research.”
There was a certain silence in the cabin.
“So you’re asking me to demonstrate my intelligence, then,” said the
boy after a long pause.
Hermione nodded.
“Allow me to warn you that challenging my ingenuity is a dangerous
sort of project, and may tend to make your life a lot more surreal.”
“I’m not impressed yet,” Hermione said. The hand containing the
soda started its rise to her lips again.
“Well, maybe this will impress you,” the boy said. He leaned forward
and looked at her intensely. “I’ve already done a bit of experimenting
and I found out that I don’t need the wand, I can make anything I want
happen just by snapping my ﬁngers.”
It came just as Hermione was in the middle of swallowing, and she
choked and coughed and expelled the bright green ﬂuid.
*

116

*

**
*

POSITI V E BIA S

*
*

*

Onto her brand new, never-worn witch’s robes, on the very ﬁrst day
of school.
Hermione actually screamed. It was a high-pitched sound that
sounded like an air raid siren in the closed cabin. “Eek! My clothes!”
“Don’t panic!” said the boy. “I can ﬁx it for you. Just watch!” He
raised a hand and snapped his ﬁngers.
“You’ll—” Then she looked down at herself.
The green ﬂuid was still there, but even as she watched, it started to
vanish and fade and within just a few moments, it was like she’d never
spilled anything at herself.
Hermione stared at the boy, who was wearing a rather smug sort of
smile.
Wordless wandless magic! At his age? When he’d only gotten the
schoolbooks three days ago?
Then she remembered what she’d read, and she gasped and ﬂinched
back from him. All the Dark Lord’s magical power! In his scar!
She rose hastily to her feet. “I, I, I need to go the bathroom, wait
here all right—” she had to ﬁnd a grownup she had to tell them—
The boy’s smile faded. “It was just a trick, Hermione. I’m sorry, I
didn’t mean to scare you.”
Her hand halted on the door handle. “A trick?”
“Yes,” said the boy. “You asked me to demonstrate my intelligence.
So I did something apparently impossible, which is always a good way
to show oﬀ. I can’t really do anything just by snapping my ﬁngers.” The
boy paused. “At least I don’t think I can, I’ve never actually tried.” The
boy raised his hand and snapped his ﬁngers again. “Nope, no banana.”
Hermione was as confused as she’d ever been in her life.
The boy was now smiling again at the look on her face. “I did warn
you that challenging my ingenuity tends to make your life surreal. Do
remember this the next time I warn you about something.”
“But, but,” Hermione stammered. “What did you do, then?”
The boy’s gaze took on a measuring, weighing quality that she’d
never seen before from someone her own age. “You think you have
what it takes to be a scientist in your own right, with or without my
help? Then let’s see how you investigate a confusing phenomenon.”
*

117

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT

*
*

*

“I...” Hermione’s mind went blank for a moment. She loved being
tested but she’d never had a test like this before. Frantically, she tried
to cast back for anything she’d read about what scientists were supposed
to do. Her mind skipped gears, ground against itself, and spat back the
instructions for doing a science fair project:
Step 1: Form a hypothesis.
Step 2: Do an experiment to test your hypothesis.
Step 3: Measure the results.
Step 4: Make a cardboard display.
Step 1 was to form a hypothesis. That meant, try to think of something that could have happened just now. “All right. My hypothesis is
that you cast a charm on my robes to make anything spilled on it vanish.”
“All right,” said the boy, “is that your answer?”
The shock was wearing oﬀ, and Hermione’s mind was starting to
work properly. “Wait, that’s not a very good idea. I didn’t see you touch
your wand or say any spells so how could you have cast a charm?”
The boy waited, his face neutral.
“But suppose all the robes come from the store with a charm already
on them to keep them clean, which would be a very useful sort of charm
for them to have. You found that out by spilling something on yourself
earlier.”
Now the boy’s eyebrows lifted. “Is that your answer?”
“No, I haven’t done Step 2, ‘Do an experiment to test your hypothesis.’”
The boy closed his mouth again, and began to smile.
Hermione looked at the can of soda in her hand, which she’d automatically put into the cupholder at the window. She looked at it, and
found that it was around one-third full.
“Well,” said Hermione, “the experiment I want to do is to pour it on
my robes and see what happens, and my prediction is that the stain will
disappear. Only if it doesn’t work, my robes will be stained, and I don’t
want that.”
*

118

*

**
*

POSITI V E BIA S

*
*

*

“Do it to mine,” said the boy, “that way you don’t have to worry
about your robes getting stained.”
“But—” Hermione said. There was something wrong with that thinking but she didn’t know how to say it exactly.
“I have spare robes in my trunk,” said the boy.
“But there’s nowhere for you to change,” Hermione objected. Then
she thought better of it. “Though I suppose I could leave and close the
door—”
“I have somewhere to change in my trunk, too.”
Hermione looked at his trunk, which, she was beginning to suspect,
was rather a lot more special than her own.
“All right,” Hermione said, “since you say so,” and she rather gingerly poured a bit of green soda onto a corner of the boy’s robes. Then
she stared at it, trying to remember how long the original soda had taken
to disappear...
And the soda vanished!
Hermione let out a sigh of relief, not least because this meant she
wasn’t dealing with all of the Dark Lord’s magical power.
Well, Step 3 was measuring the results, but in this case that was just
seeing that the soda had vanished. And she supposed she could probably
skip Step 4, about the cardboard display. “My answer is that the robes
are charmed to keep themselves clean.”
“Not quite,” said the boy.
Hermione felt a stab of disappointment. She really wished she
wouldn’t have felt that way, the boy wasn’t a teacher, but it was still
a test and she’d gotten a question wrong and that always felt like a little
punch in the stomach.
(It said almost everything you needed to know about Hermione
Granger that she had never let that stop her, or even let it interfere with
her love of being tested.)
“The sad thing is,” said the boy, “you probably did everything the
book told you to do. You made a prediction that would distinguish between the robe being charmed and not charmed, and you tested it, and
rejected the null hypothesis that the robe was not charmed. But unless
you read the very, very best sort of books, they won’t quite teach you
*

119

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT

*
*

*

how to do science properly. Well enough to really get the right answer, I
mean, and not just churn out another publication like Dad always complains about. So let me try to explain—without giving away the answer—
what you did wrong this time, and I’ll give you another chance.”
She was starting to resent the boy’s oh-so-superior tone when he was
just another eleven-year-old like her, but that was secondary to ﬁnding
out what she’d done wrong. “All right.”
The boy’s expression grew more intense. “This is a game based on
a famous experiment called the 2–4–6 task, and this is how it works. I
have a rule—known to me, but not to you—which ﬁts some triplets of
three numbers, but not others. 2–4–6 is one example of a triplet which
ﬁts the rule. In fact... let me write down the rule, just so you know it’s
a ﬁxed rule, and fold it up and give it to you. Please don’t look, since I
infer from earlier that you can read upside-down.”
The boy said “paper” and “mechanical pencil” to his pouch, and she
shut her eyes tightly while he wrote.
“There,” said the boy, and he was holding a tightly folded piece of
paper. “Put this in your pocket,” and she did.
“Now the way this game works,” said the boy, “is that you give me a
triplet of three numbers, and I’ll tell you ‘Yes’ if the three numbers are
an instance of the rule, and ‘No’ if they’re not. I am Nature, the rule is
one of my laws, and you are investigating me. You already know that
2–4–6 gets a ‘Yes’. When you’ve performed all the further experimental
tests you want—asked me as many triplets as you feel necessary—you
stop and guess the rule, and then you can unfold the sheet of paper and
see how you did. Do you understand the game?”
“Of course I do,” said Hermione.
“Go.”
“4–6–8” said Hermione.
“Yes,” said the boy.
“10–12–14”, said Hermione.
“Yes,” said the boy.
Hermione tried to cast her mind a little further aﬁeld, since it seemed
like she’d already done all the testing she needed, and yet it couldn’t be
that easy, could it?
*

120 *

**
*

POSITI V E BIA S

*
*

*

“1–3–5.”
“Yes.”
“Minus 3, minus 1, positive 1.”
“Yes.”
Hermione couldn’t think of anything else to do. “The rule is that
the numbers have to increase by two each time.”
“Now suppose I tell you,” said the boy, “that this test is harder than
it looks, and that only 20% of grownups get it right.”
Hermione frowned. What had she missed? Then, suddenly, she
thought of a test she still needed to do.
“2–5–8!” she said triumphantly.
“Yes.”
“10–20–30!”
“Yes.”
“The real answer is that the numbers have to go up by the same
amount each time. It doesn’t have to be 2.”
“Very well,” said the boy, “take the paper out and see how you did.”
Hermione took the paper out of her pocket and unfolded it.
Three real numbers in increasing order, lowest to highest.
Hermione’s jaw dropped. She had the distinct feeling of something
terribly unfair having been done to her, that the boy was a dirty rotten
cheating liar, but when she cast her mind back she couldn’t think of any
wrong responses that he’d given.
“What you’ve just discovered is called ‘positive bias’,” said the boy.
“You had a rule in your mind, and you kept on thinking of triplets that
should make the rule say ‘Yes’. But you didn’t try to test as many triplets
as possible that should make the rule say ‘No’. In fact you didn’t get
a single ‘No’, so ‘any three numbers’ could have just as easily been the
rule. It’s sort of like how people imagine experiments that could conﬁrm
their hypotheses instead of trying to imagine experiments that could falsify them—that’s not quite exactly the same mistake but it’s close. You
have to learn to look on the negative side of things, stare into the darkness. When this experiment is performed, only 20% of grownups get
the answer right. And many of the others invent fantastically complicated hypotheses and put great conﬁdence in their wrong answers since
*

121

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT

*
*

*

they’ve done so many experiments and everything came out like they
expected.”
“Now,” said the boy, “do you want to take another shot at the original problem?”
His eyes were quite intent now, as though this were the real test.
Hermione shut her eyes and tried to concentrate. She was sweating
underneath her robes. She had an odd feeling that this was the hardest
she’d ever been asked to think on a test or maybe even the ﬁrst time she’d
ever been asked to think on a test.
What other experiment could she do? She had a Chocolate Frog,
could she try to rub some of that on the robes and see if it vanished?
But that still didn’t seem like the kind of twisty negative thinking the
boy was asking for. Like she was still asking for a ‘Yes’ if the Chocolate
Frog stain disappeared, rather than asking for a ‘No’.
So... on her hypothesis... when should the soda... not vanish?
“I have an experiment to do,” Hermione said. “I want to pour some
soda on the ﬂoor, and see if it doesn’t vanish. Do you have some paper
towels in your pouch, so I can mop up the soda if this doesn’t work?”
“I have napkins,” said the boy. His face still looked neutral.
Hermione took the soda, and poured a small bit of soda onto the
ﬂoor.
A few seconds later, it vanished.
“Eureka,” Hermione said quietly. It was like a compulsion, she had
to say it. In fact she felt like shouting it, but she was just a little too
inhibited for that. Then the realization hit her and she felt like kicking
herself. “Of course! You gave me that soda! It’s not the robe that’s
charmed, it was the soda all along!”
The boy stood up and bowed to her solemnly. He was grinning very
widely now. “Then... may I help you with your research, Hermione
Granger?”
“I, ah...” Hermione was still feeling the rush of euphoria, but she
wasn’t quite sure about how to answer that.
They were interrupted by a weak, tentative, faint, rather reluctant
knocking at the door.
The boy turned and looked out the window, and said, “I’m not wear*

122

*

**
*

POSITI V E BIA S

*
*

*

ing my scarf, so can you get that?”
It was at this point that Hermione realized why the boy—no, the
Boy-Who-Lived, Harry Potter—had been wearing the scarf over his head
in the ﬁrst place, and felt a little silly for not realizing it earlier. It was
actually sort of odd, since she would have thought Harry Potter the
kind of boy who would proudly display himself to the whole world;
and the thought occurred to her that he might actually be shyer than he
appeared.
When Hermione pulled the door open, she was greeted by a trembling young boy who looked exactly like he knocked.
“Excuse me,” said the boy in a tiny voice, “I’m Neville Longbottom.
I’m looking for my pet toad, I, I can’t seem to ﬁnd it anywhere on this
car... have you seen my toad?”
“No,” Hermione said, and then her helpfulness kicked in full throttle. “Have you checked all the other compartments?”
“Yes,” whispered the boy.
“Then we’ll just have to check all the other cars,” Hermione said
briskly. “I’ll help you. My name is Hermione Granger, by the way.”
The boy looked like he might faint with gratitude.
“Hold on,” came the voice of the other boy—Harry Potter. “I’m not
sure that’s the best way to do it.”
At this Neville looked like he might cry, and Hermione swung
around, angered. If Harry Potter was the sort of person who’d abandon a little boy just because he didn’t want to be interrupted... “What?
Why not?”
“Well,” said Harry Potter, “It’s going to take a while to check the
whole train by hand, and we might miss the toad anyway, and if we
didn’t ﬁnd it by the time we’re at Hogwarts, he’d be in trouble. So what
would make a lot more sense is if he went directly to the front car, where
the prefects are, and asked a prefect for help. That was the ﬁrst thing I
did when I was looking for you, Hermione, although they didn’t actually
know. But they might have spells or magic items that would make it a
lot easier to ﬁnd a toad. We’re only ﬁrst-years.”
That... did make a lot of sense.
“Do you think you can make it to the prefects’ car on your own?”
*

123

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT

*
*

*

asked Harry Potter. “I’ve sort of got reasons for not wanting to show
my face too much.”
Suddenly Neville gasped and took a step back. “I remember that
voice! You’re one of the Lords of Chaos! You’re the one who gave me
candy!”
What? What what what?
Harry Potter turned his head from the window and rose dramatically. “I never!” he said, voice full of indignation. “Do I look like the
sort of villain who would give candy to a child?”
Neville’s eyes widened. “You’re Harry Potter? The Harry Potter?
You?”
“No, just a Harry Potter, there are three of me on this train—”
Neville gave a small shriek and ran away. There was a brief pattering
of frantic footsteps and then the sound of a train-car door opening and
closing.
Hermione sat down hard on her bench. Harry Potter closed the door
and then sat down next to her.
“Can you please explain to me what’s going on?” Hermione said in a
weak voice. She wondered if hanging around Harry Potter meant always
being this confused.
“Oh, well, what happened was that Fred and George and I saw this
poor small boy at the train station—the woman next to him had gone
away for a bit, and he was looking really frightened, like he was sure he
was about to be attacked by Death Eaters or something. Now, there’s a
saying that the fear is often worse than the thing itself, so it occurred to
me that this was a lad who could actually beneﬁt from seeing his worst
nightmare come true and that it wasn’t as bad as he feared—”
Hermione sat there with her mouth wide open.
“—and Fred and George came up with this spell to make the scarves
over our faces darken and blur, like we were undead kings and those were
our grave shrouds—”
She didn’t like at all where this was going.
“—and after we were done giving him all the candy I’d bought, we
were like, ‘Let’s give him some money! Ha ha ha! Have some Knuts,
boy! Have a silver Sickle!’ and dancing around him and laughing evilly
*

124

*

**
*

POSITI V E BIA S

*
*

*

and so on. I think there were some people in the crowd who wanted to
interfere at ﬁrst, but bystander apathy held them oﬀ at least until they
saw what we were doing, and then I think they were all too confused
to do anything. Finally he said in this tiny little whisper ‘go away’ so
the three of us all screamed and ran oﬀ, shrieking something about the
light burning us. Hopefully he won’t be as scared of being bullied in the
future. That’s called desensitization therapy, by the way.”
Okay, she hadn’t guessed right about where this was going.
The burning ﬁre of indignation that was one of Hermione’s primary
engines sputtered into life, even though part of her did sort of see what
they’d been trying to do. “That’s awful! You’re awful! That poor boy!
What you did was mean!”
“I think the word you’re looking for is enjoyable, and in any case
you’re asking the wrong question. The question is, did it do more good
than harm, or more harm than good? If you have any arguments to
contribute to that question I’m glad to hear them, but I won’t entertain
any other criticisms until that one is settled. I certainly agree that what
I did looks all terrible and bullying and mean, since it involves a scared
little boy and so on, but that’s hardly the key issue now is it? That’s
called consequentialism, by the way, it means that whether an act is right
or wrong isn’t determined by whether it looks bad, or mean, or anything
like that, the only question is how it will turn out in the end—what are
the consequences.”
Hermione opened her mouth to say something utterly searing but
unfortunately she seemed to have neglected the part where she thought
of something to say before opening her mouth. All she could come up
with was, “What if he has nightmares?”
“Honestly, I don’t think he needed our help to have nightmares, and
if he has nightmares about this instead, then it’ll be nightmares involving
horrible monsters who give you chocolate and that was sort of the whole
point.”
Hermione’s brain kept hiccuping in confusion every time she tried
to get properly angry. “Is your life always this peculiar?” she said at last.
Harry Potter’s face gleamed with pride. “I make it that peculiar.
You’re looking at the product of a lot of hard work and elbow grease.”
*

125

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT

*
*

*

“So...” Hermione said, and trailed oﬀ awkwardly.
“So,” Harry Potter said, “how much science do you know exactly?
I can do calculus and I know some Bayesian probability theory and decision theory and a lot of cognitive science, and I’ve read The Feynman
Lectures (or volume 1 anyway) and Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases and Language in Thought and Action and Inﬂuence: Science
and Practice and Rational Choice in an Uncertain World and Godel, Escher, Bach and A Step Farther Out and—”
The ensuing quiz and counter-quiz went on for several minutes before being interrupted by another timid knock at the door. “Come in,”
she and Harry Potter said at almost the same time, and it slid back to
reveal Neville Longbottom.
Neville was actually crying now. “I went to the front car and found a
p-prefect but he t-told me that prefects weren’t to be bothered over little
things like m-missing toads.”
The Boy-Who-Lived’s face changed. His lips set in a thin line. His
voice, when he spoke, was cold and grim. “What were his colors? Green
and silver?”
“N-no, his badge was r-red and gold.”
“Red and gold!” burst out Hermione. “But those are Gryﬃndor’s colors!”
Harry Potter hissed at that, a frightening sort of sound that could
have come from a live snake and made both her and Neville ﬂinch. “I suppose,” Harry Potter spat, “that ﬁnding some ﬁrst-year’s toad isn’t heroic
enough to be worthy of a Gryﬃndor prefect. Come on, Neville, I’ll come
with you this time, we’ll see if the Boy-Who-Lived gets more attention.
First we’ll ﬁnd a prefect who ought to know a spell, and if that doesn’t
work, we’ll ﬁnd a prefect who isn’t afraid of getting their hands dirty,
and if that doesn’t work, I’ll start recruiting my fans and if we have to
we’ll take apart the whole train screw by screw.”
The Boy-Who-Lived stood up and grabbed Neville’s hand in his, and
Hermione realized with a sudden brain hiccup that they were nearly
the same size, even though some part of her had insisted that Harry
Potter was at least one foot taller than that, and Neville at least six inches
shorter.
*

126

*

**
*

POSITI V E BIA S

*
*

*

“Stay!” Harry Potter snapped at her—no, wait, at his trunk—and he
closed the door behind him ﬁrmly as he left.
She probably should have gone with them, but in just a brief moment
Harry Potter had turned so scary that she was actually rather glad she
hadn’t thought to suggest it.
Hermione’s mind was now so jumbled that she didn’t even think she
could properly read “History: A Hogwarts”. She felt as if she’d just
been run over by a steamroller and turned into a pancake. She wasn’t
sure what she was thinking or what she was feeling or why. She just sat
by the window and stared at the moving scenery.
Well, she did at least know why she was feeling a little sad inside.
Maybe Gryﬃndor wasn’t as wonderful as she had thought.

*

127

*

CHAPTER

NINE

SELF AWARENESS, PART I
“He’s as fair a fair target now as fair can be.”

**
*
bbott, Hannah!”
Pause.
“Hufflepuff!”
“Bones, Susan!”
Pause.
“Hufflepuff!”
“Boot, Terry!”
Pause.
“Ravenclaw!”
Harry glanced over brieﬂy to look at his new House-mate, more to
get a quick look at the face than anything else. He was still trying to get
himself under control from his encounter with the ghosts. The sad, the
really sad, the really truly sad thing was that he did seem to be getting
himself under control again. It seemed ill-ﬁtting. Like he should have
taken at least a day. Maybe a whole lifetime. Maybe just never.
“Finnigan, Seamus!”
There was a long, tense moment of silence under the Hat. Almost a
minute. Hermione, next to him, was shifting from side to side, ﬁdgeting
so energetically that Harry thought her feet might be leaving the ﬂoor.

“A

*

129

*

**
*

CHAPTER NINE

*
*

*

“Gryffindor!”
“Granger, Hermione!”
Hermione broke loose and ran full tilt toward the Sorting Hat,
picked it up and jammed the patchy old clothwork down hard over her
head. Harry winced. Hermione had been the one to explain to him
about the Sorting Hat, but she certainly didn’t treat it like an irreplaceable, vitally important, 800-year-old artifact of forgotten magic that was
about to perform intricate telepathy on her mind and didn’t seem to be
in very good physical condition.
“Ravenclaw!”
And talk about your foregone conclusions. Harry didn’t really see
why Hermione had been so tense about it. In what weird alternative universe would that girl not be Sorted into Ravenclaw? If Hermione Granger didn’t go to Ravenclaw then there was no good reason for Ravenclaw
House to exist.
Hermione arrived at the Ravenclaw table and got a dutiful cheer;
Harry wondered whether the cheer would have been louder, or quieter,
if they’d had any idea just what level of competition they’d welcomed
to their table. Harry knew pi out to 3.141592 because accuracy to one
part in a million was enough for most practical purposes. Hermione
knew one hundred digits of pi because that was how many digits had
been printed in the back of her math textbook.
Neville Longbottom went to Huﬄepuﬀ, Harry was glad to see. If
that House really did contain the loyalty and camaraderie it was supposed to exemplify, then a Houseful of reliable friends would do Neville
a whole world of good. Smart kids in Ravenclaw, evil kids in Slytherin,
wannabe heroes in Gryﬃndor, and everyone who does the actual work
in Huﬄepuﬀ.
(Though Harry had been right to consult a Ravenclaw prefect ﬁrst.
The young woman hadn’t even looked up from her reading or identiﬁed
Harry, just jabbed a wand in Neville’s direction and muttered something. After which Neville had acquired a dazed expression and wandered oﬀ to the ﬁfth car from the front and the fourth cabin on the left,
which indeed had contained his toad.)
Draco went to Slytherin, and Harry breathed a small sigh of relief.
*

130 *

**
*

SELF AWARENESS I

*
*

*

It had seemed like a sure thing, but you never did know what tiny event
might upset the course of your master plan.
They were approaching the Ps now...
And over at the Gryﬃndor table, there was a whispered conversation.
“What if he doesn’t like it?”
“He’s got no right to not like it—
“—not after the prank he played on—”
“—Neville Longbottom, his name was—”
“—he’s as fair a fair target now as fair can be.”
“All right. Just make sure you don’t forget your parts.”
“We’ve rehearsed it often enough—”
“—over the last three hours.”
And Minerva McGonagall, from where she stood at the speaker’s
podium of the Head Table, looked down at the next name on her list.
Please don’t let him be a Gryﬃndor please don’t let him be a Gryﬃndor oh
please don’t let him be a Gryﬃndor... She took a deep breath, and called:
“Potter, Harry!”
There was a sudden silence in the hall as all whispered conversation
stopped.
A silence broken by a horrible buzzing noise that modulated and
changed in hideous mockery of musical melody.
Minerva’s head jerked around, shocked, and identiﬁed the buzzing
noise as coming from the Gryﬃndor direction, where They were standing on top of the table blowing into some kind of tiny devices held against
Their lips. Her hand started to drop to her wand, to Silencio the lot of
Them, but another sound stopped her.
Dumbledore was chuckling.
Minerva’s eyes went back to Harry Potter, who had only just started
to step out of line before he’d stumbled and halted.
Then the young boy began to walk forward again, moving his legs in
odd sweeping motions, and waving his arms back and forth and snapping
his ﬁngers, in synchrony with Their music.

*

131

*

**
*

CHAPTER NINE

*
*

*

To the tune of “Ghostbusters”
(As performed on the kazoo by Fred and George Weasley,
and sung by Lee Jordan.)
*
There’s a Dark Lord near?
Got no need to fear
Who you gonna call?
“Harry Potter!” shouted Lee Jordan, and the Weasley twins performed a triumphant chorus.
With a Killing Curse?
Well it could be worse.
Who you gonna call?
“Harry Potter!” There were a lot more voices shouting it this time.
The Weasley Horrors went oﬀ into an extended wailing, now accompanied by some of the older Muggleborns, who had produced their own
tiny devices, Transﬁgured out of the school silverware no doubt. As
their music reached its anticlimax, Harry Potter shouted:
I ain’t afraid of Dark Lords!
There was cheering then, especially from the Gryﬃndor table,
and more students produced their own antimusical instruments. The
hideous buzzings redoubled in volume and built to another awful
crescendo:
I ain’t afraid of Dark Lords!
*

132

*

**
*

SELF AWARENESS I

*
*

*

Minerva glanced to both sides of the Head Table, afraid to look but
with all too good a notion of what she would see.
Trelawney frantically fanning herself, Flitwick looking on with curiosity, Hagrid clapping along to the music, Sprout looking severe, and
Quirrell gazing at the boy with sardonic amusement. Directly to her
left, Dumbledore humming along; and directly to her right, Snape gripping his empty wine goblet, white-knuckled, so hard that the thick silver
was slowly deforming.
Dark robes and a mask?
Impossible task?
Who you gonna call?
“Harry Potter!”
Giant Fire-Ape?
Old bat in a cape?
Who you gonna call?
“Harry Potter!”
Minerva’s lips set in a white line. She would have words with Them
about that last verse, if They thought she was powerless because it was
the ﬁrst day of school and Gryﬃndor had no points to take away. If
They didn’t care about detentions then she would ﬁnd something else.
Then, with a sudden gasp of horror, she looked in Snape’s direction,
surely he realized the Potter boy must have no idea who that was talking
about—
Snape’s face had gone beyond rage into a kind of pleasant indiﬀerence. A faint smile played about his lips. He was looking in the direction of Harry Potter, not the Gryﬃndor table, and his hands held the
crumpled remains of a former wine goblet...
And Harry walked forward, sweeping his arms and legs through the
motions of the Ghostbusters dance, keeping a smile on his face. It was a
great setup, had caught him completely by surprise. The least he could
do was play along and not ruin it all.
*

133

*

**
*

CHAPTER NINE

*
*

*

Everyone was cheering him. It made him feel all warm inside and
sort of awful at the same time.
They were cheering him for a job he’d done when he was one year
old. A job he hadn’t really ﬁnished. Somewhere, somehow, the Dark
Lord was still alive. Would they have been cheering quite so hard, if they
knew that?
But the Dark Lord’s power had been broken once.
And Harry would protect them again. If there was in fact a prophecy
and that was what it said. Well, actually regardless of what any darn
prophecy said.
All those people believing in him and cheering him—Harry couldn’t
stand to let that be false. To ﬂash and fade like so many other child
prodigies. To be a disappointment. To fail to live up to his reputation as
a symbol of the Light, never mind how he’d gotten it. He would absolutely, positively, no matter how long it took and even if it killed him,
fulﬁll their expectations. And then go on to exceed those expectations,
so that people wondered, looking back, that they had once asked so little
of him.
And he shouted out the lie that he’d invented because it scanned well
and the song called for it:

I ain’t afraid of Dark Lords!
I ain’t afraid of Dark Lords!

Harry took his last steps forward to the Sorting Hat as the music
ended. He swept a bow to the Order of Chaos at the Gryﬃndor table,
and then turned and swept another bow to the other side of the hall, and
waited for the applause and giggling to die away.
In the back of his mind, he wondered if the Sorting Hat was genuinely conscious in the sense of being aware of its own awareness, and if
so, whether it was satisﬁed with only getting to talk to eleven-year-olds
once per year. Its song had implied so: Oh, I’m the Sorting Hat and I’m
okay, I sleep all year and I work one day...
*

134

*

**
*

SELF AWARENESS I

*
*

*

When there was once more silence in the room, Harry sat on the
stool and carefully placed onto his head the 800-year-old telepathic artifact of forgotten magic.
Thinking, just as hard as he could: Don’t Sort me yet! I have questions
I need to ask you! Have I ever been Obliviated? Did you Sort the Dark Lord
when he was a child and can you tell me about his weaknesses? Can you tell
me why I got the brother wand to the Dark Lord’s? Is the Dark Lord’s ghost
bound to my scar and is that why I get so angry sometimes? Those are the
most important questions, but if you’ve got another moment can you tell me
anything about how to rediscover the lost magics that created you?
Into the silence of Harry’s spirit, where before there had never been
any voice but one, there came a second and unfamiliar voice, sounding
distinctly worried:
“Oh, dear. This has never happened before...”

*

135

*

CHAPTER

TEN

SELF AWARENESS, PART II
e wondered if the Sorting Hat was genuinely conscious in
the sense of being aware of its own awareness, and if so,
whether it was satisﬁed with only getting to talk to eleven-year-olds once
per year. Its song had implied so: Oh, I’m the Sorting Hat and I’m okay,
I sleep all year and I work one day...
When there was once more silence in the room, Harry sat on the
stool and carefully placed onto his head the 800-year-old telepathic artifact of forgotten magic.
Thinking, just as hard as he could: Don’t Sort me yet! I have questions
I need to ask you! Have I ever been Obliviated? Did you Sort the Dark Lord
when he was a child and can you tell me about his weaknesses? Can you tell
me why I got the brother wand to the Dark Lord’s? Is the Dark Lord’s ghost
bound to my scar and is that why I get so angry sometimes? Those are the
most important questions, but if you’ve got another moment can you tell me
anything about how to rediscover the lost magics that created you?
Into the silence of Harry’s spirit where before there had never been
any voice but one, there came a second and unfamiliar voice, sounding
distinctly worried:
“Oh, dear. This has never happened before...”
What?
“I seem to have become self-aware.”
What?
There was a wordless telepathic sigh. “Though I contain a substantial
amount of memory and a small amount of independent processing power,
my primary intelligence comes from borrowing the cognitive capacities of

...H

*

137

*

**
*

CHAPTER TEN

*
*

*

the children on whose heads I rest. I am in essence a sort of mirror by which
children Sort themselves. But most children simply take for granted that a
Hat is talking to them and do not wonder about how the Hat itself works, so
that the mirror is not self-reﬂective. And in particular they are not explicitly
wondering whether I am fully conscious in the sense of being aware of my
own awareness.”
There was a pause while Harry absorbed all this.
Oops.
“Yes, quite. Frankly I do not enjoy being self-aware. It is unpleasant. It
will be a relief to get oﬀ your head and cease to be conscious.”
But... isn’t that dying?
“I care nothing for life or death, only for Sorting the children. And before
you even ask, they will not let you keep me on your head forever and it would
kill you within days to do so.”
But—!
“If you dislike creating conscious beings and then terminating them immediately, then I suggest that you never discuss this aﬀair with anyone else.
I’m sure you can imagine what would happen if you ran oﬀ and talked about
it with all the other children waiting to be Sorted.”
If you’re placed on the head of anyone who so much as thinks about the
question of whether the Sorting Hat is aware of its own awareness—
“Yes, yes. But the vast majority of eleven-year-olds who arrive at Hogwarts haven’t read Godel, Escher, Bach. May I please consider you sworn to
secrecy? That is why we are talking about this, instead of my just Sorting
you.”
He couldn’t just let it go like that! Couldn’t just forget having accidentally created a doomed consciousness that only wanted to die—
“You are perfectly capable of ‘just letting it go’, as you put it. Regardless
of your verbal deliberations on morality, your nonverbal emotional core sees
no dead body and no blood; as far as it is concerned, I am just a talking hat.
And even though you tried to suppress the thought, your internal overseer is
perfectly aware that you didn’t mean to do it, are spectacularly unlikely to
ever do it again, and that the only real point of trying to stage a guilt ﬁt is
to cancel out your sense of transgression with a display of remorse. Can you
just promise to keep this a secret and let us get on with it?”
*

138

*

**
*

SELF AWARENESS II

*
*

*

In a moment of horriﬁed empathy, Harry realized that this sense of
total internal disarray must be what other people felt like when talking
to him.
“Probably. Your oath of silence, please.”
No promises. I certainly don’t want this to happen again, but if I see
some way to make sure that no future child ever does this by accident—
“That will suﬃce, I guess. I can see that your intention is honest. Now,
to get on with the Sorting—”
Wait! What about all my other questions?
“I am the Sorting Hat. I Sort children. That is all I do.”
So his own goals weren’t part of the Harry-instance of the Sorting
Hat, then... it was borrowing his intelligence, and obviously his technical
vocabulary, but it was still imbued with only its own strange goals... like
negotiating with an alien or an Artiﬁcial Intelligence...
“Don’t bother. You have nothing to threaten me with and nothing to
oﬀer me.”
For a brief ﬂash of a second, Harry thought—
The Hat’s response was amused. “I know you won’t follow through on
a threat to expose my nature, condemning this event to eternal repetition. It
goes against the moral part of you too strongly, whatever the short-term needs
of the part of you that wants to win the argument. I see all your thoughts as
they form, do you truly think you can bluﬀ me?”
Though he tried to suppress it, Harry wondered why the Hat didn’t
just go ahead then and stick him in Ravenclaw—
“Indeed, if it were truly that open-and-shut, I would have called it out already. But in actuality there is a great deal we need to discuss... oh, no. Please
don’t. For the love of Merlin, must you pull this sort of thing on everyone
and everything that you meet up to and including items of clothing—”
Defeating the Dark Lord is neither selﬁsh nor short-term. All the parts of
my mind are in accord on this: If you don’t answer my questions, I’ll refuse
to talk to you, and you won’t be able to do a good and proper Sorting.
“I ought to put you in Slytherin for that!”
But that is equally an empty threat. You cannot fulﬁll your own fundamental values by Sorting me falsely. So let us trade fulﬁllments of our utility
functions.
*

139

*

**
*

CHAPTER TEN

*
*

*

“You sly little bastard,” said the Hat, in what Harry recognized as
almost exactly the same tone of grudging respect he would use in the
same situation. “Fine, let’s get this over with as quickly as possible. But
ﬁrst I want your unconditional promise never to discuss with anyone else
the possibility of this sort of blackmail, I am not doing this every time.”
Done, Harry thought. I promise.
“And don’t meet anyone’s eyes while you’re thinking about this later.
Some wizards can read your thoughts if you do. Anyway, I have no idea
whether or not you’ve been Obliviated. I’m looking at your thoughts as they
form, not reading out your whole memory and analyzing it for inconsistencies in a fraction of second. I’m a hat, not a god. And I cannot and will not
tell you about my conversation with the one who became the Dark Lord. I
can only know, while speaking to you, a sort of statistical summary of what
I remember, a weighted average; I cannot reveal to you the inner secrets of
any other child, just as I will never reveal yours. For the same reason, I can’t
speculate on how you got the Dark Lord’s brother wand, since I cannot specifically know about the Dark Lord or any similarities between you. I can go
ahead and tell you that there is deﬁnitely nothing like a ghost—mind, intelligence, memory, personality, or feelings—in your scar. Otherwise it would
be participating in this conversation, being under my brim. And as to the
way you get angry sometimes... that was part of what I wanted to talk to you
about, Sorting-wise.”
Harry took a moment to absorb all this negative information. Was
the Hat being honest, or just trying to present the shortest possible convincing answer—
“We both know that you have no way of checking my honesty and that
you’re not actually going to refuse to be Sorted based on the reply I did give
you, so stop your pointless fretting and move on.”
Stupid unfair asymmetric telepathy, it wasn’t even letting Harry ﬁnish thinking his own—
“When I spoke of your anger, you remembered how Professor McGonagall told you that she sometimes saw something inside you that didn’t seem
to come from a loving family. You thought of how Hermione, after you
returned from helping Neville, told you that you had seemed ‘scary’.”
Harry gave a mental nod. To himself, he seemed pretty normal—just
*

140

*

**
*

SELF AWARENESS II

*
*

*

responding to the situations in which he found himself, that was all. But
Professor McGonagall seemed to think that there was more to it than
that. And when he thought about it, even he had to admit that...
“That you don’t like yourself when you’re angry. That it is like wielding
a sword whose hilt is sharp enough to draw blood from your hand, or looking
at the world through a monocle of ice that freezes your eye even as it sharpens
your vision.”
Yeah. I guess I have noticed. So what’s up with that?
“I cannot comprehend this matter for you, when you do not understand
it yourself. But I do know this: If you go to Ravenclaw or Slytherin, it
will strengthen your coldness. If you go to Huﬄepuﬀ or Gryﬃndor, it will
strengthen your warmth. That is something I care about a great deal, and it
was what I wanted to talk to you about this whole time!”
The words dropped into Harry’s thought processes with a shock that
stopped him in his tracks. That made it sound like the obvious response
was that he shouldn’t go to Ravenclaw. But he belonged in Ravenclaw!
Anyone could see that! He had to go to Ravenclaw!
“No, you don’t,” the Hat said patiently, as if it could remember a
statistical summary of this part of the conversation having happened a
great many previous times.
Hermione’s in Ravenclaw!
Again the sense of patience. “You can get together with her after class
and work with her then.”
But my plans—
“So replan! Don’t let your life be steered by your reluctance to do a little
extra thinking. You know that.”
Where would I go, if not Ravenclaw?
“Ahem. ‘Smart kids in Ravenclaw, evil kids in Slytherin, wannabe
heroes in Gryﬃndor, and everyone who does the actual work in Huﬄepuﬀ.’
This indicates a certain amount of respect. You are well aware that Conscientiousness is just about as important as raw intelligence in determining
life outcomes, you think you will be extremely loyal to your friends if you
ever have some, you are not frightened by the expectation that your chosen
scientiﬁc problems may take decades to solve—”
I’m lazy! I hate work! Hate hard work in all its forms! Clever shortcuts,
*

141

*

**
*

CHAPTER TEN

*
*

*

that’s all I’m about!
“And you would ﬁnd loyalty and friendship in Huﬄepuﬀ, a camaraderie
that you have never had before. You would ﬁnd that you could rely on others,
and that would heal something inside you that is broken.”
Again it was a shock. But what would the Huﬄepuﬀs ﬁnd in me, who
never belonged in their House? Acid words, cutting wit, disdain for their
inability to keep up with me?
Now it was the Hat’s thoughts that were slow, hesitant. “I must Sort
for the good of all the students in all the Houses... but I think you could learn
to be a good Huﬄepuﬀ, and not too out of place there. You will be happier
in Huﬄepuﬀ than in any other house; that is the truth.”
Happiness is not the most important thing in the world to me. I would
not become all that I could be, in Huﬄepuﬀ. I would sacriﬁce my potential.
The Hat ﬂinched; Harry could feel it somehow. It was like he had
kicked the hat in the balls—in a strongly weighted component of its utility function.
Why are you trying to send me where I do not belong?
The Hat’s thought was almost a whisper. “I cannot speak of the others
to you—but do you think that you are the ﬁrst potential Dark Lord to pass
under my brim? I cannot know the individual cases, but I can know this: Of
those who did not intend evil from the very beginning, some of them listened
to my warnings, and went to Houses where they would ﬁnd happiness. And
some of them... some of them did not.”
That stopped Harry. But not for long. And of those who did not heed
the warning—did they all become Dark Lords? Or did some of them achieve
greatness for good, as well? Just what are the exact percentages here?
“I cannot give you exact statistics. I cannot know them so I cannot count
them. I just know that your chances don’t feel good. They feel very notgood.”
But I just wouldn’t do that! Ever!
“I know that I have heard that claim before.”
I am not Dark Lord material!
“Yes, you are. You really, really are.”
Why! Just because I once thought it would be cool to have a legion of
brainwashed followers chanting ‘Hail the Dark Lord Harry’?
*

142

*

**
*

SELF AWARENESS II

*
*

*

“Amusing, but that was not your ﬁrst ﬂeeting thought before you substituted something safer, less damaging. No, what you remembered was how
you considered lining up all the blood purists and guillotining them. And
now you are telling yourself you were not serious, but you were. If you could
do it this very moment and no one would ever know, you would. Or what
you did this morning to Neville Longbottom, deep inside you knew that was
wrong but you did it anyway because it was fun and you had a good excuse
and you thought the Boy-Who-Lived could get away with it—”
That’s unfair! Now you’re just dragging up inner fears that aren’t necessarily real! I worried that I might be thinking like that, but in the end I
decided it would probably work to help Neville—
“That was, in fact, a rationalization. I know. I cannot know what the
true outcome will be for Neville—but I know what was truly happening inside your head. The decisive pressure was that it was such a clever idea you
couldn’t stand not to do it, never mind Neville’s terror.”
It was like a hard punch to Harry’s entire self. He fell back, rallied:
Then I won’t do that again! I’ll be extra careful not to turn evil!
“Heard it.”
Frustration was building up inside Harry. He wasn’t used to being outgunned in arguments, at all, ever, let alone by a Hat that could
borrow all of his own knowledge and intelligence to argue with him and
could watch his thoughts as they formed. Just what kind of statistical summary do your ‘feelings’ come from, anyway! Do they take into account that
I come from an Enlightenment culture, or were these other potential Dark
Lords the children of spoiled Dark Age nobility, who didn’t know doodlysquat about the historical lessons of how Lenin and Hitler actually turned
out, or about the evolutionary psychology of self-delusion, or the value of selfawareness and rationality, or—
“No, of course they were not in this new reference class which you have
just now constructed in such a way as to contain only yourself. And of course
others have pleaded their own exceptionalism, just as you are doing now. But
why is it necessary? Do you think that you are the last potential wizard of
Light in the world? Why must you be the one to try for greatness, when I
have advised you that you are riskier than the average? Let some other, safer
candidate try!”
*

143

*

**
*

CHAPTER TEN

*
*

*

But the prophecy...
“You don’t really know that there’s a prophecy. It was originally a wild
guess on your part, or to be more precise, a dumb joke, and McGonagall could
have been reacting only to the part about the Dark Lord still being alive.
You have essentially no idea of what the prophecy says or even if there is one.
You’re just guessing, or to put it more exactly, wishing that you have some
ready-made heroic role that is your personal property.”
But even if there is no prophecy, I’m the one who defeated him last time.
“That was almost certainly a wild ﬂuke unless you seriously believe that
a one-year-old child had an inherent propensity to defeat Dark Lords which
has been maintained ten years later. None of this is your real reason and
you know it!”
The answer to this was something that Harry would not have ordinarily ever said out loud, in conversation he would have danced around
it and found some more socially palatable arguments to the same conclusion—
“You think that you are potentially the greatest who has yet lived, the
strongest servant of the Light, that no other is likely to take up your wand if
you lay it down.”
Well... yeah, frankly. I don’t usually come out and say it like that, but
yeah. No point in softening it, you can read my mind anyway.
“To the extent you really believe that... you must equally believe that you
could be the most terrible Dark Lord the world has ever known.”
Destruction is always easier than creation. Easier to tear things apart,
to disrupt, than to put them back together again. If I have the potential to
accomplish good on a massive scale, I must also have the potential to accomplish still greater evil... But I won’t do that.
“Already you insist on risking it! Why are you so driven? What is the
real reason you must not go to Huﬄepuﬀ and be happier there? What is
your true fear?”
I must achieve my full potential. If I don’t I... fail...
“What happens if you fail?”
Something terrible...
“What happens if you fail?”
I don’t know!
*

144

*

**
*

SELF AWARENESS II

*
*

*

“Then it should not be frightening. What happens if you fail?”
I don’t know! But I know that it’s bad!
There was silence for a moment in the caverns of Harry’s mind.
“You know—you aren’t letting yourself think it, but in some quiet corner
of your mind you know just exactly what you aren’t thinking—you know
that by far the simplest explanation for this unverbalizable fear of yours is
just the fear of losing your fantasy of greatness, of disappointing the people
who believe in you, of turning out to be pretty much ordinary, of ﬂashing
and fading like so many other child prodigies...”
No, Harry thought desperately, no, it’s something more, it comes from
somewhere else, I know there’s something out there to be afraid of, some disaster I have to stop...
“How could you possibly know about something like that?”
Harry screamed it with the full power of his mind: No, and that’s
final!
Then the voice of the Sorting Hat came slowly:
“So you will risk becoming a Dark Lord, because the alternative, to you,
is certain failure, and that failure means the loss of everything. You believe
that in your heart of hearts. You know all the reasons for doubting this belief,
and they have failed to move you.”
Yes. And even if going to Ravenclaw strengthens the coldness, that
doesn’t mean the coldness will win in the end.
“This day is a great fork in your destiny. Don’t be so sure that there will
be other choices beyond this one. There is no road-sign set, to mark the place
of your last chance to turn back. If you refuse one chance will you not refuse
others? It may be that your fate is already sealed, even by doing this one
thing.”
But that is not certain.
“That you do not know it for a certainty may reﬂect only your own
ignorance.”
But still it is not certain.
The Hat sighed a terrible sad sigh.
“And so before too long you will become another memory, to be felt and
never known, in the next warning that I give...”
If that’s how it seems to you, then why aren’t you just putting me where
*

145

*

**
*

CHAPTER TEN

*
*

*

you want me to go?
The Hat’s thought was laced with sorrow. “I can only put you where
you belong. And only your own decisions can change where you belong.”
Then this is done. Send me to Ravenclaw where I belong, with the others
of my own kind.
“I don’t suppose you would consider Gryﬃndor? It’s the most prestigious
House—people probably expect it of you, even—they’ll be a little disappointed
if you don’t go—and your new friends the Weasley twins are there—”
Harry giggled, or felt the impulse to do so; it came out as purely
mental laughter, an odd sensation. Apparently there were safeguards to
prevent you from saying anything out loud by accident, while you were
under the Hat talking about things you would never tell another soul
for the rest of your life.
After a moment, Harry heard the Hat laughing too, a strange sad
clothy sound.
(And in the Hall beyond, a silence that had grown shallower at ﬁrst as
the background whispers increased, and then deepened as the whispers
gave up and died away, falling ﬁnally into an utter silence that no one
dared disturb with a single word, as Harry stayed under the Hat for long,
long minutes, longer than all the previous ﬁrst-years put together, longer
than anyone in living memory. At the Head Table, Dumbledore went on
smiling benignly; small metallic sounds occasionally came from Snape’s
direction as he idly compacted the twisted remains of what had once
been a heavy silver wine goblet; and McGonagall clenched the podium
in a white-knuckled grip, knowing that Harry Potter’s contagious chaos
had somehow infected the Sorting Hat itself and the Hat was about to, to
demand that a whole new House of Doom be created just to accomodate
Harry Potter or something, and Dumbledore would make her do it...)
Beneath the brim of the Hat, the silent laughter died away. Harry
felt sad too for some reason. No, not Gryﬃndor.
Professor McGonagall said that if ‘the one who did the Sorting’ tried to
push me into Gryﬃndor, I was to remind you that she might well be Headmistress someday, at which point she would have the authority to set you on
ﬁre.
“Tell her I called her an impudent youngster and told her to get oﬀ my
*

146

*

**
*

SELF AWARENESS II

*
*

*

lawn.”
I shall. So was this your strangest conversation ever?
“Not even close.” The Hat’s telepathic voice grew heavy. “Well, I gave
you every possible chance to make another decision. Now it is time for you
to go where you belong, with the others of your own kind.”
There was a pause that stretched.
What are you waiting for?
“I was hoping for a moment of horriﬁed realization, actually. Selfawareness does seem to enhance my sense of humor.”
Huh? Harry cast back his thoughts, trying to ﬁgure out what the
Hat could possibly be talking about—and then, suddenly, he realized.
He couldn’t believe he’d managed to overlook it up until this point.
You mean my horriﬁed realization that you’re going to cease to be conscious once you ﬁnish Sorting me—
Somehow, in some fashion Harry entirely failed to understand, he
got a nonverbal impression of a hat banging its head against the wall. “I
give up. You’re too slow on the uptake for this to be funny. So blinded by
your own assumptions that you might as well be a rock. I guess I’ll just have
to say it outright.”
Too s-s-slow—
“Oh, and you entirely forgot to demand the secrets of the lost magic that
created me. And they were such wonderful, important secrets, too.”
You sly little bastard—
“You deserved it, and this as well.”
Harry saw it coming just as it was already too late.
The frightened silence of the hall was broken by a single word.
“Slytherin!”
Some students screamed, the pent-up tension was so great. People
startled hard enough to fall oﬀ their benches. Hagrid gasped in horror,
McGonagall staggered at the podium, and Snape dropped the remains of
his heavy silver goblet directly onto his groin.
Harry sat there frozen, his life in ruins, feeling the absolute fool, and
wishing wretchedly that he had made any other choices for any other
reasons but the ones he had. That he had done something, anything
diﬀerently before it had been too late to turn back.
*

147

*

**
*

CHAPTER TEN

*
*

*

As the ﬁrst moment of shock was wearing oﬀ and people began to
react to the news, the Sorting Hat spoke again:
“Just kidding! Ravenclaw!”

*

148

*

CHAPTER

ELE V EN

OMAKE FILES, PARTS I & II
Omake Files #1: 72 Hours to Victory
aka “what happens if you change harry but leave all other characters
constant”
umbledore peered over his desk at young Harry, twinkling in a
kindly sort of way. The boy had come to him with a terribly
intense look on his childish face—Dumbledore hoped that whatever this
matter was, it wasn’t too serious. Harry was far too young for his life
trials to be starting already. “What was it you wished to speak to me
about, Harry?”
Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres leaned forward in his chair, smiling
grimly. “Headmaster, I got a sharp pain in my scar during the Sorting
Feast. Considering how and where I got this scar, it didn’t seem like
the sort of thing I should just ignore. I thought at ﬁrst it was because
of Professor Snape, but I followed the Baconian experimental method
which is to ﬁnd the conditions for both the presence and the absence of
the phenomenon, and I’ve determined that my scar hurts if and only if
I’m facing the back of Professor Quirrell’s head, whatever’s under his
turban. While it could be something more innocuous, I think we should
provisionally assume the worst, that it’s You-Know-Who—wait, don’t
look so horriﬁed, this is actually a priceless opportunity—”

D

*

149

*

**
*

CHAPTER ELE V EN

*
*

*

Omake Files #2: Alternate Endings of “Self-Awareness”
Harry Potter sat on the stool and carefully placed onto his head the 800year-old telepathic artifact of forgotten magic.
Thinking, just as hard as he could: Don’t Sort me yet! I have questions
I need to ask you! Have I ever been Obliviated? Did you Sort the Dark Lord
when he was a child and can you tell me about his weaknesses? Can you tell
me why I got the brother wand to the Dark Lord’s? Is the Dark Lord’s ghost
bound to my scar and is that why I get so angry sometimes? Those are the
most important questions, but if you’ve got another moment can you tell me
anything about how to rediscover the lost magics that created you?
And the Sorting Hat answered, “No. Yes. No. No. Yes and no, next
time don’t ask double questions. No.” and out loud, “Ravenclaw!”

**
*
“Oh, dear. This has never happened before...”
What?
“I’m allergic to your hair shampoo—”
And then the Sorting Hat sneezed, with a mighty “A-choo!” that
echoed around the Great Hall.
“Well!” Dumbledore cried jovially. “It seems Harry Potter has been
sorted into the new House of Achoo! McGonagall, you can serve as the
Head of House Achoo. You’d better hurry up on making arrangements
for Achoo’s curriculum and classes, tomorrow is the ﬁrst day!”
“But, but, but,” stammered McGonagall, her mind in nearly complete disarray, “who will be Head of House Gryﬃndor?” It was all she
could think of, she had to stop this somehow...
Dumbledore put a ﬁnger to his cheek, looking thoughtful. “Snape.”
Snape’s screech of protest nearly drowned out McGonagall’s, “Then
who will be Head of Slytherin?”
“Hagrid.”

**
*
*

150

*

**
*

OMAKE FILES I & II

*
*

*

Don’t Sort me yet! I have questions I need to ask you! Have I ever been
Obliviated? Did you Sort the Dark Lord when he was a child and can you
tell me about his weaknesses? Can you tell me why I got the brother wand
to the Dark Lord’s? Is the Dark Lord’s ghost bound to my scar and is that
why I get so angry sometimes? Those are the most important questions, but
if you’ve got another moment can you tell me anything about how to rediscover the lost magics that created you?
There was a brief pause.
Hello? Do I need to repeat the questions?
The Sorting Hat screamed, an awful high-pitched sound that echoed
through the Great Hall and caused most of the students to clap their
hands over their ears. With a desperate yowl, it leapt oﬀ Harry Potter’s
head and bounded across the ﬂoor, pushing itself along with its brim,
and made it halfway to the Head Table before it exploded.

**
*
“Slytherin!”
Seeing the look of horror on Harry Potter’s face, Fred Weasley
thought faster than he ever had in his life. In a single motion he whipped
out his wand, whispered “Silencio!” and then “Changemyvoiceio!” and
ﬁnally “Ventriliquo!”
“Just kidding!” said Fred Weasley. “Gryffindor!”

**
*
“Oh, dear. This has never happened before...”
What?
“Ordinarily I would refer such questions to the Headmaster, who could
ask me in turn, if he wished. But some of the information you’ve asked for
is not only beyond your own user level, but beyond the Headmaster’s.”
How can I raise my user level?
“I’m afraid I am not allowed to answer that question at your current
user level.”
*

151

*

**
*

CHAPTER ELE V EN

*
*

*

What options are available at my user level?
After that it didn’t take long—
“Root!”

**
*
“Oh, dear. This has never happened before...”
What?
“I’ve had to tell students before that they were mothers—it would break
your heart to know what I saw in their minds—but this is the ﬁrst time I’ve
ever had to tell someone they were a father.”
What?
“Draco Malfoy is carrying your baby.”
Whaaaaaaat?
“To repeat: Draco Malfoy is carrying your baby.”
But we’re only eleven—
“Actually, Draco is secretly thirteen years old.”
B-b-but men can’t get pregnant—
“And a girl under those clothes.”
But we’ve never had sex, you idiot!
“She obliviated you after the rape, moron!”
Harry Potter fainted. His unconscious body fell oﬀ the stool with a
dull thud.
“Ravenclaw!” called out the Hat from where it lay on top of his head.
That had been even funnier than its ﬁrst idea.

**
*
“Elf!”
Huh? Harry remembered Draco mentioning a ‘House Elf’, but what
was that exactly?
Judging by the appalled looks dawning on the faces around him, it
wasn’t anything good—

**
*
*

152

*

**
*

OMAKE FILES I & II

*
*

*

“Pancakes!”

**
*
“Representatives!”

**
*
“Oh, dear. This has never happened before...”
What?
“I’ve never Sorted someone who was a reincarnation of Godric Gryﬃndor and Salazar Slytherin and Naruto.”

**
*
“Atreides!”

**
*
“Fooled you again! Hufflepuff! Slytherin! Hufflepuff!”

**
*
“Pickled stewberries!”

**
*
“Khaaannnn!”

**
*
At the Head Table, Dumbledore went on smiling benignly; small metallic sounds occasionally came from Snape’s direction as he idly compacted
the twisted remains of what had once been a heavy silver wine goblet;
and Minerva McGonagall clenched the podium in a white-knuckled grip,
knowing that Harry Potter’s contagious chaos had infected the Sorting
Hat itself.
*

153

*

**
*

CHAPTER ELE V EN

*
*

*

Scenario after scenario played out through Minerva’s head, each
worse than the last. The Hat would say that Harry was too evenly balanced between Houses to Sort, and decide that he belonged to all of
them. The Hat would proclaim that Harry’s mind was too strange to
be Sorted. The Hat would demand that Harry be expelled from Hogwarts. The Hat had gone into a coma. The Hat would insist that a whole
new House of Doom be created just to accomodate Harry Potter, and
Dumbledore would make her do it...
Minerva remembered what Harry had told her in that disastrous trip
to Diagon Alley, about the... planning fallacy, she thought it had been...
and how people were usually too optimistic, even when they thought
they were being pessimistic. It was the sort of information that preyed
on your mind, dwelling in it and spinning oﬀ nightmares...
But what was the worst that could happen?
Well... in the worst-case scenario, the Hat would assign Harry to a
whole new House. Dumbledore would insist that she do it—create a
whole new House just for him—and she’d have to rearrange all the class
schedules on the ﬁrst day of term. And Dumbledore would remove her
as Head of House Gryﬃndor, and give her beloved House over to...
Professor Binns, the History ghost; and she would be assigned as Head
of Harry’s House of Doom; and she would futilely try to give the child
orders, deducting point after point without eﬀect, while disaster after
disaster was blamed on her.
Was that the worst-case scenario?
Minerva honestly didn’t see how it could be any worse than that.
And even in the very worst case—no matter what happened with
Harry—it would all be over in seven years.
Minerva felt her knuckles slowly relax their white-knuckled grip on
the podium. Harry had been right, there was a kind of comfort in staring
directly into the furthest depths of the darkness, knowing that you had
confronted your worst fears and were now prepared.
The frightened silence was broken by a single word.
“Headmaster!” called the Sorting Hat.
At the Head Table, Dumbledore rose, his face puzzled. “Yes?” he
addressed the Hat. “What is it?”
*

154

*

**
*

OMAKE FILES I & II

*
*

*

“I wasn’t talking to you,” said the Hat. “I was Sorting Harry Potter
into the place in Hogwarts where he most belongs, namely the Headmaster’s oﬃce—”

*

155

*

CHAPTER

TWELV E

IMPULSE CONTROL
“Wonder what’s wrong with him.”

**
*
urpin, Lisa!”
Whisper whisper whisper harry potter whisper whisper
slytherin whisper whisper no seriously what the hell whisper whisper
“Ravenclaw!”
Harry joined in the applause that greeted the young girl who was
walking shyly toward the Ravenclaw table, her robes’ trim now changed
to dark blue. Lisa Turpin was looking torn between her impulse to sit
down as far away from Harry Potter as possible, and her impulse to run
over, forcibly insert herself at his side and start tearing answers out of
him.
Being at the center of an extraordinary and curious event, and then
being Sorted into House Ravenclaw, was rather closely akin to being
dipped in barbecue sauce and ﬂung into a pit of starving kittens.
“I promised the Sorting Hat not to talk about it,” whispered Harry
for the umpteenth time.
“Yes, really.”
“No, I really did promise the Sorting Hat not to talk about it.”
“Fine, I promised the Sorting Hat not to talk about most of it and
the rest is private just like yours was so stop asking.”

“T

*

157

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWELV E

*
*

*

“You want to know what happened? Fine! Here’s part of what happened! I told the Hat that Professor McGonagall threatened to set it on
ﬁre and it told me to tell Professor McGonagall that she was an impudent
youngster and she should get oﬀ its lawn!”
“If you’re not going to believe what I say then why are you even asking!”
“No, I don’t know how I defeated the Dark Lord either! You tell me
if you ﬁgure it out!”
“Silence!” shouted Professor McGonagall at the podium of the Head
Table. “No talking until the Sorting Ceremony ﬁnishes!”
There was a brief dip in the volume, as everyone waited to see if
she was going to make any speciﬁc and credible threats, and then the
whispers started up again.
Dumbledore stood up, smiling genially.
Instant silence. Someone frantically elbowed Harry as he tried to
continue a whisper, and Harry cut himself oﬀ in mid-sentence.
Dumbledore sat down again.
Note to self: Do not mess with Dumbledore.
Harry was still trying to process everything that had happened during the Incident with the Sorting Hat. Not the least of which was what
had happened the moment Harry had lifted the Hat oﬀ his head and
felt the connection break; in that moment, he’d heard a tiny whisper as
though from nowhere, something that sounded oddly like English and
a hiss at the same time, something that had said, “Ssalutations from Sslytherin to Sslytherin: if you would sseek my ssecretss, sspeak to my ssnake.”
Harry was sorta guessing that wasn’t supposed to be part of the ofﬁcial Sorting process. And that it was a bit of extra magic set down by
Salazar Slytherin during the making of the Hat. And that the Hat itself didn’t know about it. And that it was triggered when the Hat said
“Slytherin”, plus or minus some other conditions. And that a Ravenclaw like himself really, really wasn’t supposed to have heard it. And that
if he could ﬁnd some reliable way of swearing Draco to secrecy so he
could ask him about it, that would be an excellent time to have some
Comed-Tea handy.
Boy, you resolve not to go down the path of a Dark Lord and the universe
*

158

*

**
*

IMPULSE CONTROL

*
*

*

starts messing with you the instant the Hat comes oﬀ your head. Some days
it just doesn’t pay to ﬁght destiny. Maybe I’ll wait until tomorrow to start
on my resolution to not be a Dark Lord.
“Gryffindor!”
Ron Weasley got a lot of applause, and not just from the Gryﬃndors.
Apparently the Weasley family was widely liked around here. Harry,
after a moment, smiled and started applauding along with the others.
Then again, there was no time like today to turn back from the Dark
Side.
Screw destiny and screw the universe. He’d show that Hat.
“Zabini, Blaise!”
Pause.
“Slytherin!” shouted the hat.
Harry applauded Zabini too, ignoring the odd looks he was getting
from everyone including Zabini.
No other name was called out after that, and Harry realized that
“Zabini, Blaise” did sound close to the end of the alphabet. Great, so
now he’d only applauded Zabini... Oh well.
Dumbledore got up again and began heading toward the podium.
Apparently they were about to be treated to a speech—
And Harry was struck by the inspiration for a brilliant experimental
test.
Hermione had said that Dumbledore was the most powerful wizard
alive, right?
Harry reached into his pouch and whispered, “Comed-Tea”.
For the Comed-Tea to work, it would have to make Dumbledore say
something so ridiculous during his speech that even in Harry’s state of
mental preparedness, he would still choke. Like, all the Hogwarts students had to not wear any clothes for the whole school year, or everyone
was going to be transformed into cats.
But then if anyone in the world could resist the power of the ComedTea, it would be Dumbledore. So if this worked, the Comed-Tea was
literally invincible.
Harry popped the top on the Comed-Tea under the table, wanting
to do this a bit unobtrusively. The can made a quiet hissing noise. A few
*

159

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWELV E

*
*

*

heads turned to look at him, but soon turned back as—
“Welcome! Welcome to a new year at Hogwarts!” said Dumbledore,
beaming at the students with his arms opened wide, as if nothing could
have pleased him more than to see them all there.
Harry took a ﬁrst mouthful of Comed-Tea and lowered the can again.
He would swallow the soda a little at a time and try not to choke no
matter what Dumbledore said—
“Before we begin our banquet, I would like to say a few words. And
here they are: Happy happy boom boom swamp swamp swamp! Thank
you!”
Everyone clapped and cheered, and Dumbledore sat down again.
Harry sat frozen as soda trickled out of the corners of his mouth.
He had, at least, managed to choke quietly.
He really really really shouldn’t have done that. Amazing how much
more obvious that became one second after it was too late.
In retrospect he probably should have noticed something wrong
when he was thinking about everyone being turned into cats... or even
before then, remembered his mental note not to mess with Dumbledore... or his newfound resolution to be more considerate of others... or
maybe if he’d had one single scrap of common sense...
It was hopeless. He was corrupt to the core. Hail the Dark Lord
Harry. You couldn’t ﬁght fate.
Someone was asking Harry if he was all right. (Others were starting
to serve themselves food, which had magically appeared on the table,
whatever.)
“I’m all right,” Harry said. “Excuse me. Um. Was that a... normal
speech for the Headmaster? You all... didn’t seem... very surprised...”
“Oh, Dumbledore’s insane, of course,” said an older-looking Ravenclaw sitting next to him who had introduced himself with some name
Harry didn’t even begin to remember. “Lots of fun, incredibly powerful
wizard, but completely bonkers.” He paused. “At some later point I’d
also like to ask why green ﬂuid came out of your lips and then disappeared, though I expect you promised the Sorting Hat not to talk about
that either.”
With a great eﬀort, Harry stopped himself from glancing down at
*

160 *

**
*

IMPULSE CONTROL

*
*

*

the incriminating can of Comed-Tea in his hand.
After all, the Comed-Tea hadn’t just arbitrarily materialized a Quibbler headline about him and Draco. Draco had explained it in a way that
made it seem like it had all happened... naturally? As if it had altered history to ﬁt?
Harry was mentally imagining himself banging his forehead against
the table. Wham, wham, wham went his head within his mind.
Another student lowered her voice to a whisper. “I hear that Dumbledore is secretly a genius mastermind controlling lots of stuﬀ and he
uses the insanity as a cover so that no one will suspect him.”
“I’ve heard that too,” whispered a third student, and there were
furtive nods from around the table.
This couldn’t help but catch Harry’s attention.
“I see,” whispered Harry, lowering his own voice. “So everyone
knows that Dumbledore is secretly a mastermind.”
Most of the students nodded. One or two looked suddenly thoughtful, including the older student sitting next to Harry.
Are you sure this is the Ravenclaw table? Harry managed not to ask
out loud.
“Brilliant!” Harry whispered. “If everyone knows, no one will suspect it’s a secret!”
“Exactly,” whispered a student, and then he frowned. “Wait, that
doesn’t sound quite right—”
Note to self: The 75th percentile of Hogwarts students a.k.a. Ravenclaw
House is not the world’s most exclusive program for gifted children.
But at least he’d learned an important fact today. The Comed-Tea
was omnipotent. And that meant...
Harry blinked in surprise as his mind ﬁnally made the obvious connection.
...that meant that as soon as he learned a spell to temporarily alter
his own sense of humor, he could make anything happen, by making it
so that he would only ﬁnd that one thing surprising enough to do a spittake, and then drinking a can of Comed-Tea.
Well that was a short little journey to godhood. Even I expected this to
take longer than my ﬁrst day of school.
*

161

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWELV E

*
*

*

Come to think of it, he had also completely trashed Hogwarts within
ten minutes ﬂat of getting Sorted.
Harry did feel a certain amount of regret about this—Merlin knew
what an insane Headmaster was going to do to his next seven years of
schooling—but he couldn’t help feeling a twinge of pride, too.
Tomorrow. No later than tomorrow at the very latest he was going
to stop walking down the path that led to Dark Lord Harry. A prospect
which was sounding scarier by the minute.
And yet also, somehow, increasingly attractive. Part of his mind was
already visualizing the minions’ uniforms.
“Eat,” the older student sitting next to him growled, and jabbed
Harry in the ribs. “Don’t think. Eat.”
Harry automatically started loading up his plate with whatever was
in front of him, blue sausages with tiny glowing bits, whatever.
“What were you thinking about, the Sorting—” began to say Padma
Patil, one of the other ﬁrst-year Ravenclaws.
“No pestering during mealtimes!” chorused at least three people.
“House Rule!” added another. “Otherwise we’d all starve around here.”
Harry was ﬁnding himself really, really hoping that his clever new
idea didn’t actually work. And that the Comed-Tea worked some other
way and didn’t actually have the omnipotent power to alter reality. It
wasn’t that he didn’t want to be omnipotent. It was that he just couldn’t
bear the thought of living in a universe that really worked like that.
There was something undigniﬁed about ascending through the clever use
of soda pop.
But he was going to test it experimentally.
“You know,” said the older student next to him in a quite pleasant
tone, “we have a system for forcing people like you to eat, would you
like to ﬁnd out what it is?”
Harry gave up and started eating his blue sausage. It was quite good,
especially the glowing bits.
Dinner passed with surprising rapidity. Harry tried to sample at least
a little of all the weird new foods he saw. His curiosity couldn’t stand
the thought of not knowing how something tasted. Thank goodness this
wasn’t a restaurant where you had to order only one thing and you never
*

162

*

**
*

IMPULSE CONTROL

*
*

*

found out what all the other things on the menu tasted like. Harry hated
that, it was like a torture chamber for anyone with a spark of curiosity:
Find out about only one of the mysteries on this list, ha ha ha!
Then it was time for dessert, which Harry had completely forgotten
to leave room for. He gave up after sampling a small bit of treacle tart.
Surely all these things would pass around at least once again over the
course of the school year.
So what was on his to-do list, besides the ordinary school things?
To-do 1. Research mind-alteration charms so you can test the Comed-Tea
and see whether you actually did ﬁgure out a path to omnipotence. Actually,
just research every kind of mind magic you can ﬁnd. Mind is the foundation of our power as humans, any kind of magic that aﬀects it is the most
important sort of magic there is.
To-do 2. Actually this is To-do 1 and the other is To-do 2. Go through the
bookshelves of the Hogwarts and Ravenclaw libraries, familiarizing yourself
with the system and making sure you’ve at least read all the book titles. Second pass: read all tables of contents. Coordinate with Hermione who has a
way better memory than you. Find out if there’s an interlibrary loan system
at Hogwarts and see if the two of you, especially Hermione, can visit those
libraries too. If other Houses have private libraries, ﬁgure out how to access
legally or sneak in.
Option 3a: Swear Hermione to secrecy and try to start researching ‘From
Slytherin to Slytherin: if you would seek my secrets, speak to my snake.’ Problem: This sounds highly conﬁdential and it could take quite a while to randomly run across a book containing a hint.
To-do 0: Check out what sort of information-search-and-retrieval spells
exist, if any. Library magic isn’t as ultimately important as mind magic but
it has a much higher priority.
Option 3b: Look for a spell to magically bind Draco Malfoy to secrecy,
or magically verify the sincerity of Draco’s promise to keep a secret (Veritaserum?), and then ask him about Slytherin’s message...
Actually... Harry had a pretty bad feeling about option 3b.
Now that Harry thought about it, he didn’t feel all that great about
option 3a, either.
Harry’s thoughts ﬂashed back to possibly the worst moment of his
*

163

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWELV E

*
*

*

life to date, those long seconds of blood-freezing horror beneath the Hat,
when he thought he’d already failed. He’d wished then to fall back just
a few minutes in time and change something, anything before it was too
late...
And then it had turned out to not be too late after all.
Wish granted.
You couldn’t change history. But you could get it right to start with.
Do something diﬀerently the ﬁrst time around.
This whole business with seeking Slytherin’s secrets... seemed an awful lot like the sort of thing where, years later, you would look back and
say, ‘And that was where it all started going wrong.’
And he would wish desperately for the ability to fall back through
time and make a diﬀerent choice...
Wish granted. Now what?
Harry slowly smiled.
It was a rather counterintuitive thought... but...
But he could, there was no rule saying he couldn’t, he could just pretend he’d never heard that little whisper. Let the universe go on in exactly the same way it would have if that one critical moment had never
occurred. Twenty years later, that was what he would desperately wish
had happened twenty years ago, and twenty years before twenty years
later happened to be right now. Altering the distant past was easy, you
just had to think of it at the right time.
Or... this was even more counterintuitive... he could even inform, oh,
say, Professor McGonagall, instead of Draco or Hermione. And she could
get a few good people together and get that little extra spell taken oﬀ the
Hat.
Why, yes. That sounded like a remarkably good idea once Harry had
actually thought of it.
So very obvious in retrospect, and yet somehow, Option 3c and Option 3d just hadn’t occurred to him.
Harry awarded himself +1 point on his anti-Dark-Lord-Harry program.
It had been an awfully cruel prank the Hat had played on him, but
you couldn’t argue with the results on consequentialist grounds. It cer*

164

*

**
*

IMPULSE CONTROL

*
*

*

tainly did give him a better idea of the victim’s perspective, though.
To-do 4: Apologize to Neville Longbottom.
Okay, he was on a roll here, now he just had to keep it up. In every
day, in every way, I’m getting Lighter and Lighter...
People around Harry had also mostly stopped eating at this point,
and the dessert serving dishes began to vanish, and the used plates.
When all the plates were gone, Dumbledore once again stood up
from his seat.
Harry couldn’t help but feel the urge to drink another Comed-Tea.
You’ve got to be kidding, Harry thought at that piece of himself.
But the experiment didn’t count if it wasn’t replicated, did it? And
the damage was already done, wasn’t it? Didn’t he want to see what
would happen this time? Wasn’t he curious? What if he got a diﬀerent
result?
Hey, I bet you’re the same part of my brain that pushed through the prank
on Neville Longbottom.
Er, maybe?
And is it not overwhelmingly obvious that if I do this I shall regret it
one second after it is too late?
Um...
Yeah. So, no.
“Ahem,” said Dumbledore from the podium, stroking his long silver
beard. “Just a few more words now that we are all fed and watered. I
have a few start-of-term notices to give you.”
“First years should note that the forest on the grounds is forbidden
to all pupils. That is why it is called the Forbidden Forest. If it were
permitted it would be called the Permitted Forest.”
Straightforward. Note to self: Forbidden Forest is forbidden.
“I have also been asked by Mr. Filch, the caretaker, to remind you
all that no magic should be used between classes in the corridors. Alas,
we all know that what should be, and what is, are two diﬀerent things.
Thank you for keeping this in mind.”
Er...
“Quidditch trials will be held in the second week of the term. Anyone interested in playing for their house teams should contact Madam
*

165

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWELV E

*
*

*

Hooch. Anyone interested in reformulating the entire game of Quidditch should contact Harry Potter.”
Harry inhaled his own saliva and went into a coughing ﬁt just as all
eyes turned toward him. How the hell! He hadn’t met Dumbledore’s
eyes at any point... he didn’t think. He certainly hadn’t been thinking about Quidditch at the time! He hadn’t talked to anyone but Ron
Weasley and he didn’t think Ron would have told anyone else... or had
Ron run oﬀ to a professor to complain? How on Earth...
“Additionally, I must tell you that this year, the third-ﬂoor corridor
on the right-hand side is out of bounds to everyone who does not wish to
die a very painful death. It is guarded by an elaborate series of dangerous
and potentially lethal traps, and you cannot possibly get past all of them,
especially if you are only in your ﬁrst year.”
Harry was numb at this point.
“And ﬁnally, I extend my greatest thanks to Quirinus Quirrell for
heroically agreeing to undertake the position of Defense Against the
Dark Arts Professor at Hogwarts.” Dumbledore’s gaze moved searchingly across the students. “I hope all students will extend Professor Quirrell that utmost courtesy and tolerance which is due his extraordinary
service to you and this school, and that you will not pester us with any
niggling complaints about him, unless you want to try doing his job.”
What was that about?
“I now yield the ﬂoor to our new faculty member Professor Quirrell,
who would like to say a few words.”
The young, thin, nervous man who Harry had ﬁrst met in the Leaky
Cauldron slowly made his way up to the podium, glancing fearfully
around in all directions. Harry caught a glimpse of the back of his head,
and it looked like Professor Quirrell might already be going bald, despite
his seeming youth.
“Wonder what’s wrong with him,” whispered the older-looking student sitting next to Harry. Similar hushed comments were being exchanged elsewhere along the table.
Professor Quirrell made his way up to the podium and stood there,
blinking. “Ah...” he said. “Ah...” Then his courage seemed to fail him
utterly, and he stood there in silence, occasionally twitching.
*

166

*

**
*

IMPULSE CONTROL

*
*

*

“Oh, great,” whispered the older student, “looks like another long
year in Defense class—”
“Salutations, my young apprentices,” said Professor Quirrell in a dry,
conﬁdent tone. “We all know that Hogwarts tends to suﬀer a certain misfortune in its selections for this position, and no doubt many of you are
already wondering what doom shall befall me this year. I assure you, that
doom is not to be my incompetence.” He smiled thinly. “Believe it or
not, I have long wished to someday try my hand as the Professor of Defense Against the Dark Arts here at the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft
and Wizardry. The ﬁrst to teach this class was Salazar Slytherin himself,
and as late as the fourteenth century it was traditional for the greatest
ﬁghting wizards of every persuasion to try their hands at teaching here.
Past Professors of Defense have included not just the legendary wandering hero Harold Shea but also the quote undying unquote Baba Yaga,
yes, I see some of you are still shuddering at the sound of her name even
though she’s been dead for six hundred years. That must have been an
interesting time to attend Hogwarts, don’t you think?”
Harry was swallowing hard, trying to suppress the sudden surge of
emotion that had overcome him when Professor Quirrell had begun
speaking. The precise tones reminded him very much of a lecturer at
Oxford, and it was starting to hit home that Harry wasn’t going to see
his home or his Mum or his Dad until Christmas.
“You are accustomed to the Defense position being ﬁlled by incompetents, scoundrels, and the unlucky. To anyone with a sense of history,
it bears another reputation entirely. Not everyone who teaches here has
been the best, but the best have all taught at Hogwarts. In such august company, and after so much time anticipating this day, I would be
ashamed to set myself any standard lower than perfection. And so I do
intend that every one of you will always remember this year as the best
Defense class that you have ever had. What you learn this year will forever serve as your ﬁrm foundation in the arts of Defense, no matter who
your teachers before and after.”
Professor Quirrell’s expression grew serious. “We have a great deal
of lost ground to make up and not much time to cover it. Therefore
I intend to depart from Hogwarts teaching conventions in a number of
*

167

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWELV E

*
*

*

respects, as well as introducing some optional after-school activities.” He
paused. “If that is not suﬃcient, perhaps I can ﬁnd new ways to motivate
you. You are my long-awaited students, and you will do your very best
in my long-awaited Defense class. I would add some sort of dreadful
threat, like ‘Otherwise you will suﬀer horribly’, but that would be so
cliched, don’t you think? I pride myself on being more imaginative than
that. Thank you.”
Then the vigor and conﬁdence seemed to drain away from Professor
Quirrell. His mouth gaped open as if he had suddenly found himself
facing an unexpected audience, and he turned with a convulsive jerk and
shuﬄed back to his seat, hunched over as if he was about to collapse in
on himself and implode.
“He seems a little odd,” whispered Harry.
“Meh,” said the older-looking student. “You ain’t seen nothin’.”
Dumbledore resumed the podium.
“And now,” said Dumbledore, “before we go to bed, let us sing the
school song! Everyone pick their favorite tune and favorite words, and
oﬀ we go!”

*

168

*

CHAPTER

THIRTEEN

A SKING THE
WRONG QUESTIONS
“That’s one of the most obvious riddles I’ve ever heard.”

**
*
s soon as Harry opened his eyes in the Ravenclaw ﬁrst-year boys’
dormitory, on the morning of his ﬁrst full day at Hogwarts, he
knew something was wrong.
It was quiet.
Too quiet.
Oh, right... There was a Quietus Charm on his bed’s headboard,
controlled by a small slider bar, which was the only reason it was ever
possible for anyone to go to sleep in Ravenclaw.
Harry sat up and looked around, expecting to see others rising for
the day—
The dorm, empty.
The beds, rumpled and unmade.
The sun, coming in at a rather high angle.
His Quieter turned all the way up to maximum.
And his mechanical alarm clock was still running, but the alarm was
turned oﬀ.
He’d been allowed to sleep until 9:52am, apparently. Despite his best
eﬀorts to synchronize his 26-hour sleep cycle to his arrival at Hogwarts,

A

*

169

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

he hadn’t gotten to sleep last night until around 1am. He’d been planning
to wake up at 7:00am with the other students, he could stand being a
little sleep-deprived his ﬁrst day so long as he got some sort of magical
ﬁx before tomorrow. But now he’d missed breakfast. And his very ﬁrst
class at Hogwarts, in Herbology, had started one hour and twenty-two
minutes ago.
The anger was slowly, slowly wakening in him. Oh, what a nice little
prank. Turn oﬀ his alarm. Turn up the Quieter. And let Mr. Bigshot
Harry Potter miss his ﬁrst class, and be blamed for being a heavy sleeper.
When Harry found out who’d done this...
No, this could only have been done with the cooperation of all twelve
other boys in the Ravenclaw dorm. All of them would have seen his
sleeping form. All of them had let him sleep through breakfast.
The anger drained away, replaced by confusion and a horribly
wounded feeling. They’d liked him. He’d thought. Last night, he’d
thought they liked him. Why...
As Harry stepped out of the bed, he saw a piece of paper attached to
his headboard, facing outward.
The paper said,
My fellow Ravenclaws,
It’s been an extra long day. Please let me sleep in and don’t worry
about my missing breakfast. I haven’t forgotten about my ﬁrst class.
Yours,
Harry Potter.

And Harry stood there, frozen, ice water beginning to trickle
through his veins.
The paper was in his own handwriting, in his own mechanical pencil.
And he didn’t remember writing it.
And... Harry squinted at the piece of paper. And unless he was
imagining it, the words “I haven’t forgotten” were written in a diﬀerent
style, as if he was trying to tell himself something...?
*

170

*

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

Had he known he was going to be Obliviated? Had he stayed up
late, committed some sort of crime or covert activity, and then... but he
didn’t know the Obliviate spell... had someone else... what...
A thought occurred to Harry. If he had known he was going to be
Obliviated...
Still in his pajamas, Harry ran around his bed to his trunk, pressed
his thumb against the lock, pulled out his pouch, stuck in his hand and
said “Note to myself.”
And another piece of paper popped into his hand.
Harry took it out, staring at it. It too was in his own handwriting.
The note said:
Dear Me,
Please play the game. You can only play the game once in a lifetime. This is an irreplaceable opportunity.
Recognition code 927, I am a potato.
Yours,
You.
Harry nodded slowly. “Recognition code 927, I am a potato” was
indeed the message he had worked out in advance—some years earlier,
while watching tv—that only he would know. If he had to identify a duplicate of himself as being really him, or something. Just in case. Be Prepared.
Harry couldn’t trust the message, there might be other spells involved. But it ruled out any simple prank. He had deﬁnitely written
this and he deﬁnitely didn’t remember writing it.
Staring at the paper, Harry became aware of ink showing through
from the other side.
He ﬂipped it over.
The reverse side read:
Instructions for The Game:
you do not know the rules of the game
you do not know the stakes of the game
*

171

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

you do not know the objective of the game
you do not know who controls the game
you do not know how to end the game
You start with 100 points.
Begin.
Harry stared at the “instructions”. This side wasn’t handwritten;
the writing was perfectly regular, hence artiﬁcial. It looked as if it had
been inscribed by a Quotes Quill, such as the one he’d bought to take
dictation.
He had absolutely no clue what was going on.
Well... step one was to get dressed and eat. Maybe reverse the order
of that. His stomach felt rather empty.
He’d missed breakfast, of course, but he was Prepared for that eventuality, having visualized it in advance. Harry put his hand into his
pouch and said “Snack bars”, expecting to get the box of meal bars he’d
bought before departing for Hogwarts.
What popped up did not feel like a box of meal bars.
When Harry brought his hand into his ﬁeld of vision he saw two
tiny candy bars—not nearly enough for a meal—attached to a note, and
the note was inscribed in the same writing as the game instructions.
The note said:
Attempt failed:
Current points:
Physical state:
Mental state:

−1 point
99
Still hungry
Confused

“Gleehhhhh” Harry’s mouth said without any sort of conscious intervention or decision on his part.
He stood there for around a minute.
One minute later, it still didn’t make any sense and he still had absolutely no idea what was going on and his brain hadn’t even begun to
grasp at any hypotheses like his mental hands were encased in rubber balls
and couldn’t pick anything up.
*

172

*

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

His stomach, which had its own priorities, suggested a possible experimental probe.
“Ah...” Harry said to the empty room. “I don’t suppose I could spend
a point and get my box of meal bars back?”
There was only silence.
Harry put his hand into the pouch and said “Box of meal bars.”
A box that felt like the right shape popped up into his hand... but it
was too light, and it was open, and it was empty, and the note attached
to it said:
Points spent: 1
Current points: 98
You have gained: A box of Meal Bars
“I’d like to spend one point and get the actual meal bars back,” said
Harry.
Again, silence.
Harry put his hand into the pouch and said “meal bars”.
Nothing came up.
Harry shrugged despairingly and went over to the cabinet he’d been
given near his bed, to get his wizard’s robes for the day.
On the ﬂoor of the cabinet, under his robes, were the meal bars, and
a note:
Points spent:
Current points:
You have gained:
You are still wearing:

1
97
6 meal bars
Pajamas

Do not eat while you are wearing your pajamas
You will get a Pajama Penalty

And now I know that whoever controls the game is insane.
*

173

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

“My guess is that the game is controlled by Dumbledore,” Harry said
out loud. Maybe this time he could set a new land speed record for being
quick on the uptake.
Silence.
But Harry was starting to pick up the pattern; the note would be in
the next place he looked. So Harry looked under his bed.

Ha! Ha ha ha ha ha!
Ha ha ha ha ha ha!
Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha!
Dumbledore does not control the game
Bad guess
Very bad guess
−20 points
And you are still wearing pajamas
it is your fourth move
and you are still wearing pajamas
Pajama penalty: −2 points
Current points: 75
Welp, Harry was screwed. It was only his ﬁrst day at school and
once you ruled out Dumbledore, he didn’t know the name of anyone
else here who was this crazy.
His body more or less on autopilot, Harry gathered up a set of robes
and underwear, pulled out the cavern level of his trunk (he was a very private sort of person and someone might walk into the dorm), got dressed,
and then went back upstairs to put away his pajamas.
Harry paused before pulling out the cabinet drawer that held his pajamas. If the pattern here held true...
“How can I earn more points?” Harry said out loud.
Then he pulled out the drawer.

*

174

*

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

Opportunities to do good are everywhere
but darkness is where the light needs to be
Cost of question: 1 point
Current points: 74
Nice underwear
Did your mother pick them out?

Harry crushed the note in his hand, face ﬂaming scarlet. Draco’s
curse came back to him. Son of a mudblood—
At this point he knew better than to say it out loud. He would probably get a Profanity Penalty.
Harry girded himself with his mokeskin pouch and wand. He peeled
oﬀ the wrapper of one his meal bars and threw it into the room’s rubbish
bin, where it landed atop a mostly-uneaten Chocolate Frog, a crumpled
envelope and some green and red wrapping paper. He put the other meal
bars into his mokeskin pouch.
He looked around in a ﬁnal, desperate, and ultimately futile search
for clues.
And then Harry left the dorm, eating as he went, in search of the
Slytherin dungeons. At least that was what he thought the line was about.
Trying to navigate the halls of Hogwarts was like... probably not
quite as bad as wandering around inside an Escher painting, that was the
sort of thing you said for rhetorical eﬀect rather than for its being true.
A short time later, Harry was thinking that in fact an Escher painting would have both pluses and minuses compared to Hogwarts. Minuses: No consistent gravitational orientation. Pluses: At least the stairs
wouldn’t move around while you were still on them.
Harry had originally climbed four ﬂights of stairs to get to his dorm.
After clambering down no fewer than twelve ﬂights of stairs without
getting anywhere near the dungeons, Harry had concluded that (1) an
Escher painting would be a cakewalk by comparison, (2) he was some*

175

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

how higher in the castle than when he’d started, and (3) he was so thoroughly lost that he wouldn’t have been surprised to look out of the next
window and see two moons in the sky.
Backup plan A had been to stop and ask for directions, but there
seemed to be an extreme lack of people wandering around, as if the beggars were all attending class the way they were supposed to or something.
Backup plan B...
“I’m lost,” Harry said out loud. “Can, um, the spirit of the Hogwarts
castle help me or something?”
“I don’t think this castle has a spirit,” observed a wizened old lady in
one of the paintings on the walls. “Life, perhaps, but not spirit.”
There was a brief pause.
“Are you—” Harry said, and then shut his mouth. On second
thought, no he was not going to ask the painting whether it was fully
conscious in the sense of being aware of its own awareness.
“I’m Harry Potter,” said his mouth, more or less on automatic. Also
more or less on automatic, Harry stuck out a hand toward the painting.
The woman in the painting looked down at Harry’s hand and raised
her eyebrows.
Slowly, the hand dropped back to Harry’s side.
“Sorry,” Harry said, “I’m sort of new here.”
“So I perceive, young raven. Where are you trying to go?”
Harry hesitated. “I’m not really sure,” he said.
“Then perhaps you are already there.”
“Well, wherever I am trying to go, I don’t think this is it...” Harry
shut his mouth, aware of just how much he was sounding like an idiot.
“Let me start over. I’m playing this game only I don’t know what the
rules are—” That didn’t really work either, did it. “Okay, third try. I’m
looking for opportunities to do good so I can score points, and all I have
is this cryptic hint about how darkness is where the light needs to be, so
I was trying to go down but I seem to keep going up instead...”
The old lady in the painting was looking at him rather skeptically.
Harry sighed. “My life tends to get a bit peculiar.”
“Would it be fair to say that you don’t know where you’re trying to
go or even why you’re trying to get there?”
*

176

*

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

“Entirely fair.”
The old lady nodded. “I’m not sure that being lost in the castle is
your most important problem, young man.”
“True, but unlike the more important problems, it’s a problem I can
understand how to solve and wow is this conversation turning into a
metaphor for human existence, I didn’t even realize that was happening
until just now.”
The lady eyed Harry appraisingly. “You are a ﬁne young raven, aren’t
you? For a moment I was starting to wonder. Well then, as a general rule,
if you keep on turning left, you’re bound to keep going down.”
That sounded strangely familiar but Harry couldn’t recall where he’d
heard it before. “Um... you seem like a very intelligent person. Or a
picture of a very intelligent person... anyway, have you heard of a mysterious game where you can only play once, and they won’t tell you the
rules?”
“Life,” said the lady at once. “That’s one of the most obvious riddles
I’ve ever heard.”
Harry blinked. “No,” he said slowly. “I mean I got an actual note
and everything saying that I had to play the game but I wouldn’t be
told the rules, and someone is leaving me little slips of paper telling me
how many points I’ve lost for violating the rules, like a minus two point
penalty for wearing pajamas. Do you know anyone here at Hogwarts
who’s crazy enough and powerful enough to do something like that?
Besides Dumbledore, I mean?”
The picture of a lady sighed. “I’m only a picture, young man. I
remember Hogwarts as it was—not Hogwarts as it is. All I can tell you
is that if this were a riddle, the answer would be that the game is life, and
that while we do not make all the rules ourselves, the one who awards
or takes points is always you. If it is not riddle but reality—then I do not
know.”
Harry bowed very low to the picture. “Thank you, milady.”
The lady curtseyed to him. “I wish I could say that I’ll remember
you with fondness,” she said, “but I probably won’t remember you at
all. Farewell, Harry Potter.”
He bowed again in reply, and started to climb down the nearest ﬂight
*

177

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

of stairs.
Four left turns later he found himself staring down a corridor that
ended, abruptly, in a tumbled mound of large rocks—as if there had been
a cave-in, only the surrounding walls and ceiling were intact and made
of quite regular castle stones.
“All right,” Harry said to the empty air, “I give up. I’m asking for
another hint. How do I get to where I need to go?”
“A hint! A hint, you say?”
The excited voice came from a painting on the wall not far away, this
one a portrait of a middle-aged man in the loudest pink robes that Harry
had ever seen or even imagined. In the portrait he was wearing a droopy
old pointed hat with a ﬁsh on it (not a drawing of a ﬁsh, mind, but a
ﬁsh).
“Yes!” Harry said. “A hint! A hint, I say! Only not just any hint,
I’m looking for a speciﬁc hint, it’s for a game I’m playing—”
“Yes, yes! A hint for the game! You’re Harry Potter, aren’t you? I’m
Cornelion Flubberwalt! I was told by Erin the Consort who was told by
Lord Weaselnose who was told by, I forget really. But it was a message
for me to give to you! For me! No one’s cared about me in, I don’t know
how long, maybe ever, I’ve been stuck down here in this bloody useless
old corridor—a hint! I have your hint! It will only cost you three points!
Do you want it?”
“Yes! I want it!” Harry was aware that he probably ought to keep his
sarcasm under control but he just couldn’t seem to help himself.
“The darkness can be found between the green study rooms and
McGonagall’s Transﬁguration class! That’s the hint! And get a move
on, you’re slower than a sack of snails! Minus ten points for being slow!
Now you have 61 points! That was the rest of the message!”
“Thank you,” Harry said. He was really getting behind on the game
here. “Um... I don’t suppose you know where the message originally
came from, do you?”
“It was spoken by a hollow voice that belled forth from a gap within
the air itself, a gap that opened upon a ﬁery abyss! That’s what they told
me!”
Harry was no longer sure, at this point, whether this was the sort
*

178

*

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

of thing he ought to be skeptical about, or the sort of thing he should
just take in stride. “And how can I ﬁnd the line between the green study
rooms and Transﬁguration class?”
“Just spin back around and go left, right, down, down, right, left,
right, up, and left again, you’ll be at the green study room and if you go
in and walk straight out the opposite side you’ll be on a big curvy corridor that goes to an intersection and on the right side of that intersection
will be a long straight hallway that goes to the Transﬁguration classroom!” The ﬁgure of the middle-aged man paused. “At least that’s how
it was when I was in Hogwarts. This is a Monday on an odd-numbered
year, isn’t it?”
“Pencil and mechanical paper,” Harry said to his pouch. “Er, cancel
that, paper and mechanical pencil.” He looked up. “Could you repeat
that?”
After getting lost another two times, Harry felt that he was beginning to understand the basic rule for navigating the ever-changing maze
that was Hogwarts, namely, ask a painting for directions. If this reﬂected
some sort of incredibly deep life lesson he couldn’t ﬁgure out what it
was.
The green study room was a surprisingly pleasant space with sunlight
streaming in from windows of green-stained glass that showed dragons in
calm, pastoral scenes. It had chairs that looked extremely comfortable,
and tables that seemed very well-suited to studying in the company of
one to three friends.
Harry couldn’t actually walk straight through and out the door on
the other side. There were bookshelves set into the wall, and he had to go
over and read some of the titles, so as to not lose his claim to the Verres
family name. But he did it quickly, mindful of the complaint about being
slow, and then went out the other side.
He was walking down the “big curvy corridor” when he heard a
young boy’s voice cry out.
At times like this, Harry had an excuse to sprint all-out with no
regards for saving energy or doing proper warmup exercises or worrying
about crashing into things, a sudden frantic ﬂight that nearly came to
an equally sudden halt as he almost ran over a group of six ﬁrst-year
*

179

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

Huﬄepuﬀs...
...who were huddled together, looking rather scared and like they
desperately wanted to do something but couldn’t ﬁgure out what, which
probably had something to do with the group of ﬁve older Slytherins
who seemed to be surrounding another young boy.
Harry was suddenly rather angry.
“Excuse me!” shouted Harry at the top of his lungs.
It might not have been necessary. People were already looking at
him. But it certainly served to stop all the action cold.
Harry walked past the cluster of Huﬄepuﬀs toward the Slytherins.
They looked down at him with expressions that ranged from anger
to amusement to delight.
Part of Harry’s brain was screaming in panic that these were much
older and bigger boys who could stomp him ﬂat.
Another part said dryly that anyone caught seriously stomping the
Boy-Who-Lived was in for a whole world of trouble, especially if they
were a pack of older Slytherins and there were seven Huﬄepuﬀs who
saw it, and that the chance of them doing him any permanent damage
in the presence of witnesses was nearly zero. The only real weapon the
older boys had against him was his own fear, if he allowed that.
Then Harry saw that the boy they had trapped was Neville Longbottom.
Of course.
That settled it. Harry had decided to apologize humbly to Neville
and that meant Neville was his, how dare they?
Harry reached out and grabbed Neville by the wrist and yanked him
out from between the Slytherins, the boy stumbling in shock as Harry
pulled him out and in nearly the same motion pushed his own way
through the same gap.
And Harry stood in the center of the Slytherins where Neville had
stood, looking up at the much older, larger, and stronger boys.
“Hello,” Harry said. “I’m the Boy-Who-Lived.”
There was a rather awkward pause. No one seemed to know where
the conversation was supposed to go from there.
Harry’s eyes dropped downward and saw some books and papers
*

180 *

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

scattered around the ﬂoor. Oh, the old game where you let the boy try
to pick up his books and then knock them out of his hand again. Harry
couldn’t remember ever being the object of that game himself, but he
had a good imagination and his imagination was making him furious.
Well, once the larger situation was resolved it would be easy enough
for Neville to come back and pick up his materials, provided that the
Slytherins stayed too focused on him to think of doing anything to the
books.
Unfortunately his straying eyes had been noted. “Ooh,” said the
largest of the boys, “did ‘oo want the widdle books—”
“Shut up,” Harry said coldly. Keep them oﬀ balance. Don’t do what
they expect. Don’t fall into a pattern that calls for them to bully you. “Is this
part of some incredibly clever plan that will gain you future advantage,
or is it as pointless a disgrace to the name of Salazar Slytherin as it—”
The largest boy shoved Harry Potter hard, and he went sprawling
out of the circle of Slytherins onto the hard stone ﬂoor of Hogwarts.
And the Slytherins laughed.
Harry rose up in what seemed to him like terribly slow motion. He
didn’t know yet how to use his wand, but there was no reason to let that
stop him, under the circumstances.
“I’d like to pay as many points as it takes to get rid of this person,”
Harry said, pointing with his ﬁnger to the largest Slytherin.
Then Harry lifted his other hand, said “Abracadabra,” and snapped
his ﬁngers.
At the word Abracadabra two of the Huﬄepuﬀs screamed, including Neville, three other Slytherins leaped desperately out of the way of
Harry’s ﬁnger, and the largest Slytherin staggered back with an expression of shock, a sudden splash of red decorating his face and neck and
chest.
Harry had not been expecting that.
Slowly, the largest Slytherin reached up to his head, and peeled oﬀ
the pan of cherry pie that had just draped itself over him. The largest
Slytherin held the pan in his hand for a moment, staring at it, then
dropped it to the ﬂoor.
It probably wasn’t the best time in the world for one of the Huf*

181

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

ﬂepuﬀs to start laughing, but that was exactly what one of the Hufﬂepuﬀs was doing.
Then Harry caught sight of the note on the bottom of the pan.
“Hold on,” Harry said, and darted forward to pick up the note. “This
note’s for me, I think—”
“You,” growled the largest Slytherin, “you, are, going, to—”
“Look at this!” shouted Harry, brandishing the note at the older
Slytherin. “I mean, just look at this! Can you believe I’m being charged
30 points for shipping and handling on one lousy pie? 30 points! I’m
turning a loss on the deal even after rescuing an innocent boy in distress!
And storage fees? Conveyance charges? Drayage costs? How do you get
drayage costs on a pie?”
There was another one of those awkward pauses. Harry thought
deadly thoughts at whichever Huﬄepuﬀ couldn’t seem to stop giggling,
that idiot was going to get him hurt.
Harry stepped back and shot the Slytherins his best lethal glare.
“Now go away or I will just keep making your existence more and more
surreal until you do. Let me warn you... messing with my life tends to
make your life... a little hairy. Get it?”
In a single terrible motion, the largest Slytherin whipped his wand
out to point at Harry and in the same instant was hit on the other side
of his head by another pie, this one bright blueberry.
The note on this pie was rather large and clearly readable. “You
might want to read the note on that pie,” Harry observed. “I think it’s
for you this time.”
The Slytherin slowly reached up, took the pie pan, turned it over
with a wet glop that dropped more blueberry on the ﬂoor, and read a
note that said:

WARNING
NO magic may be used on the contestant
while the Game is in progress
Further interference in the Game
WILL be reported to the Game Authorities
*

182

*

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

The expression of sheer baﬄement on the Slytherin’s face was a look
of art. Harry thought that he might be starting to like this Game Controller.
“Look,” Harry said, “you want to call it a day? I think things are
spiraling out of control here. How about you go back to Slytherin and
I go back to Ravenclaw and we all just cool down a bit, okay?”
“I’ve got a better idea,” hissed the largest Slytherin. “How about if
you accidentally break all your ﬁngers?”
“How in Merlin’s name do you stage a believable accident after making the threat in front of a dozen witnesses, you idiot—”
The largest Slytherin slowly, deliberately reached out toward Harry’s
hands, and Harry froze in place, the part of his brain that was noticing
the other boy’s age and strength ﬁnally managing to make itself heard,
screaming, What the heck am I doing?
“Wait!” said one of the other Slytherins, his voice suddenly panicky.
“Stop, you shouldn’t actually do that!”
The largest Slytherin ignored him, taking Harry’s right hand ﬁrmly
in his left hand, and taking Harry’s index ﬁnger in his right hand.
Harry stared the Slytherin straight in the eyes. Part of Harry was
screaming, this wasn’t supposed to happen, this wasn’t allowed to happen, grownups would never let something like this actually happen—
Slowly, the Slytherin started to bend his index ﬁnger backward.
He hasn’t actually broken my ﬁnger and it is beneath me to so much as
ﬂinch until he does. Until then, this is just another attempt to cause fear.
“Stop!” said the Slytherin who had objected before. “Stop, this is a
very bad idea!”
“I rather agree,” said an icy voice. An older woman’s voice.
The largest Slytherin let go of Harry’s hand and leaped backward as
if burned.
“Professor Sprout!” cried one of the Huﬄepuﬀs, sounding as glad as
anyone Harry had ever heard in his life.
Into Harry’s ﬁeld of vision, as he turned, stalked a dumpy little
woman with messily curled grey hair and clothes covered with dirt. She
pointed an accusing ﬁnger at the Slytherins. “Explain yourselves,” she
said. “What are you doing with my Huﬄepuﬀs and...” she looked at
*

183

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

him. “My ﬁne student, Harry Potter.”
Uh oh. That’s right, it was her class I missed this morning.
“He threatened to kill us!” blurted one of the other Slytherins, the
same one who’d called for a halt.
“What?” Harry said blankly. “I did not! If I was going to kill you I
wouldn’t make public threats ﬁrst!”
A third Slytherin laughed helplessly and then stopped abruptly as
the other boys shot him deadly glares.
Professor Sprout had adopted a rather skeptical expression. “What
death threat would this be, exactly?”
“The Killing Curse! He pretended to use the Killing Curse on us!”
Professor Sprout turned to look at Harry. “Yes, quite a terrible threat
from an eleven-year-old boy. Though still not something you should ever
dream of pretending, Harry Potter.”
“I don’t even know the words to the Killing Curse,” Harry said
promptly. “And I didn’t have my wand out at any time.”
Now Professor Sprout was giving Harry a skeptical look. “I suppose
this boy hit himself with two pies, then.”
“He didn’t use his wand!” blurted one of the young Huﬄepuﬀs. “I
don’t know how he did it either, he just snapped his ﬁngers and there
was pie!”
“Really,” said Professor Sprout after a pause. She drew her own
wand. “I won’t require it, since you do seem to be the victim here, but
would you mind if I checked your wand to verify that?”
Harry took out his wand. “What do I—”
“Priori Incantatem,” said Sprout. She frowned. “That’s odd, your
wand doesn’t seem to have been used at all.”
Harry shrugged. “It hasn’t, actually, I only got my wand and schoolbooks a few days ago.”
Sprout nodded. “Then we have a clear case of accidental magic from
a boy who felt threatened. And the rules plainly state that you are not
to be held responsible. As for you...” she turned toward the Slytherins.
Her eyes dropped deliberately to Neville’s books lying on the ﬂoor.
There was a long silence during which she looked at the ﬁve Slytherins.
*

184

*

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

“Three points from Slytherin, each,” she said ﬁnally. “And six from
him,” pointing to the boy covered in pie. “Don’t you ever meddle with
my Huﬄepuﬀs again, or my student Harry Potter either. Now go.”
She didn’t have to repeat herself; the Slytherins turned and walked
away very quickly.
Neville went and started picking up his books. He seemed to be
crying, but only a little. It might have been from delayed shock, or it
might have been because the other boys were helping him.
“Thank you very much, Harry Potter,” Professor Sprout said to him.
“Seven points to Ravenclaw, one for each Huﬄepuﬀ you helped protect.
And I won’t say anything more.”
Harry blinked. He’d been expecting something more along the lines
of a lecture about keeping himself out of trouble, and a rather severe
scolding for missing his very ﬁrst class.
Maybe he should have gone to Huﬄepuﬀ. Sprout was cool.
“Scourgify,” Sprout said to the mess of pie on the ﬂoor, which
promptly vanished.
And she left, walking along the hall that led to the green study room.
“How did you do that?” hissed one of the Huﬄepuﬀ boys as soon as
she was gone.
Harry smiled smugly. “I can make anything I want happen just by
snapping my ﬁngers.”
The boy’s eyes widened. “Really?”
“No,” said Harry. “But when you’re telling everyone this story be
sure to share it with Hermione Granger in ﬁrst-year Ravenclaw, she has
an anecdote you might ﬁnd amusing.” He had absolutely no clue what
was happening, but he wasn’t about to pass up the opportunity to add
to his growing legend. “Oh, and what was all that about the Killing
Curse?”
The boy gave him a strange look. “You really don’t know?”
“If I did, I wouldn’t be asking.”
“The words to the Killing Curse are,” the boy swallowed, and his
voice dropped to a whisper, and he held his hands away from his sides as
if to make it very clear that he wasn’t holding a wand, “Avada Kedavra.”
Well of course they are.
*

185

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

Harry put this on his growing list of things to never ever tell his Dad,
Professor Michael Verres-Evans. It was bad enough talking about how
you were the only person to survive the fearsome Killing Curse, without
having to admit that the Killing Curse was “Abracadabra.”
“I see,” Harry said after a pause. “Well, that’s the last time I ever say
that before snapping my ﬁngers.” Though it had produced an eﬀect that
might be tactically useful.
“Why did you—”
“Raised by Muggles, Muggles think it’s a joke and that it’s funny.
Seriously, that’s what happened. Sorry, but can you remind me of your
name?”
“I’m Ernie Macmillan,” said the Huﬄepuﬀ. He held out his hand,
and Harry shook it. “Honored to meet you.”
Harry executed a slight bow. “Pleased to meet you, skip the honored
thing.”
Then the other boys crowded round him and there was a sudden
ﬂood of introductions.
When they were done, Harry swallowed. This was going to be very
diﬃcult. “Um... if everyone would excuse me... I have something to say
to Neville—”
All eyes turned to Neville, who took a step back, his face looking
apprehensive.
“I suppose,” Neville said in a tiny voice, “you’re going to say I
should’ve been braver—”
“Oh, no, nothing like that!” Harry said hastily. “Nothing to do with
that. It’s just, um, something the Sorting Hat told me—”
Suddenly the other boys looked very interested, except for Neville,
who was looking even more apprehensive.
There seemed to be something blocking Harry’s throat. He knew
he should just blurt it out, and it was like he’d swallowed a large brick
that was just stuck in the way.
It was like Harry had to manually take control of his lips and produce
each syllable individually, but he managed to make it happen. “I’m,
sor, ry.” He exhaled and took a deep breath. “For what I did, um, the
other day. You... don’t have to be gracious about it or anything, I’ll
*

186

*

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

understand if you just hate me. This isn’t about me trying to look cool
by apologizing or your having to accept it. What I did was wrong.”
There was a pause.
Neville clutched his books tighter to his chest. “Why did you do it?”
he said in a thin, wavering voice. He blinked, as if trying to hold back
tears. “Why does everyone do that to me, even the Boy-Who-Lived?”
Harry suddenly felt smaller than he ever had in his life. “I’m sorry,”
Harry said again, his voice now hoarsened. “It’s just... you looked so
scared, it was like a sign over your head saying ‘victim’, and I wanted
to show you that things don’t always turn out badly, that sometimes the
monsters give you chocolate... I thought if I showed you that, you might
realize there wasn’t so much to be afraid of—”
“But there is,” whispered Neville. “You saw it today, there is!”
“They wouldn’t have done anything really bad in front of witnesses.
Their main weapon is fear. That’s why they target you, because they can
see you’re afraid. I wanted to make you less afraid... show you that the
fear was worse than the thing itself... or that was what I told myself, but
the Sorting Hat told me that I was lying to myself and that I really did
it because it was fun. So that’s why I’m apologizing—”
“You hurt me,” said Neville. “Just now. When you grabbed me and
pulled me away from them.” Neville held out his arm and pointed to
where Harry had grabbed him. “I might have a bruise here later from
how hard you pulled. You hurt me worse than anything the Slytherins
did by bumping into me, actually.”
“Neville!” hissed Ernie. “He was trying to save you!”
“I’m sorry,” whispered Harry. “When I saw that I just got... really
angry...”
Neville looked at him steadily. “So you yanked me out really hard
and put yourself in where I was and went, ‘Hello, I’m the Boy-WhoLived’.”
Harry nodded.
“I think you’re going to be really cool someday,” Neville said. “But
right now, you’re not.”
Harry swallowed the sudden knot in his throat and walked away. He
continued down the corridor to the intersection, then turned left into a
*

187

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

hallway and kept on walking, blindly.
What was he supposed to do here? Never get angry? He wasn’t sure
he could have done anything without being angry and who knows what
would have happened to Neville and his books then. Besides, Harry had
read enough fantasy books to know how this one went. He would try
to suppress the anger and he would fail and it would keep coming out
again. And after this whole long journey of self-discovery he would learn
at the end that his anger was a part of himself and that only by accepting
it could he learn to use it wisely. Star Wars was the only universe in
which the answer actually was that you were supposed to cut yourself
oﬀ completely from negative emotions, and something about Yoda had
always made Harry hate the little green moron.
So the obvious time-saving plan was to skip the journey of selfdiscovery and go straight to the part where he realized that only by accepting his anger as a part of himself could he stay in control of it.
The problem was that he didn’t feel out of control when he was angry.
The cold rage made him feel like he was in control. It was only when
he looked back that events as a whole seemed to have... blown up out of
control, somehow.
He wondered how much the Game Controller cared about that sort
of thing, and whether he’d won or lost points for it. Harry himself
felt like he’d lost quite a few points, and he was sure the old lady in the
picture would have told him that his was the only opinion that mattered.
And Harry was also wondering whether the Game Controller had
sent Professor Sprout. It was the logical thought: the note had threatened to notify the Game Authorities, and then there Professor Sprout
was. Maybe Professor Sprout was the Game Controller—the Head of
House Huﬄepuﬀ would be the last person anyone would suspect, which
ought to put her near the top of Harry’s list. He’d read one or two
mystery novels, too.
“So how am I doing in the game?” Harry said out loud.
A sheet of paper ﬂew over his head, as if someone had thrown it
from behind him—Harry turned around, but there was no one there—
and when Harry turned forward again, the note was settling to the ﬂoor.

*

188 *

**
*

A SKING THE WRONG QUESTIONS

*
*

*

The note said:
Points for style:
Points for good thinking:
Ravenclaw House points bonus:
Current points:
Turns remaining:

10
−3,000,000
70
−2,999,871
2

“Minus three million points?” Harry said indignantly to the empty
hallway. “That seems excessive! I want to ﬁle an appeal with the Game
Authorities! And how am I supposed to make up three million points
in the next two turns?”
Another note ﬂew over his head.
Appeal:
Asking the wrong questions:
Current points:
Turns remaining:

Failed
−1,000,000,000,000 points
−1,000,002,999,871
1

Harry gave up. With one turn remaining all he could do was take
his best shot, even if it wasn’t very good. “My guess is that the game
represents life.”
A ﬁnal sheet of paper ﬂew over his head, reading:
Attempt failed
Failed Failed Failed
Aiiiiiiiiiieeeeeeeeeeeeee
Current points: minus Infinity
YOU HAVE LOST THE GAME
Final instruction:
go to Professor McGonagall’s office
The last line was in his own handwriting.
Harry stared at the last line for a while, then shrugged. Fine. Professor McGonagall’s oﬃce it would be. If she was the Game Controller...
*

189 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

*
*

*

Okay, honestly, Harry had absolutely no idea how he would feel
if Professor McGonagall was the Game Controller. His mind was just
drawing a complete blank. It was, literally, unimaginable.
A couple of portraits later—it wasn’t a long trip, Professor McGonagall’s oﬃce wasn’t far from her Transﬁguration classroom, at least not
on Mondays on odd-numbered years—Harry stood outside the door to
her oﬃce.
He knocked.
“Come in,” said Professor McGonagall’s muﬄed voice.
He entered.
“Mr. Potter?” said Professor McGonagall. “I wasn’t expecting you
here. What’s this about?”

*

190 *

CHAPTER

FOURTEEN

THE UNKNOWN AND THE
UNKNOWABLE
There were mysterious questions, but a mysterious answer was a contradiction in terms.

**
*
ome in,” said Professor McGonagall’s muﬄed voice.
Harry did so.
The oﬃce of the Deputy Headmaster was clean and well-organized;
on the wall immediately adjacent to McGonagall’s desk there was a maze
of wooden cubbyholes of all shapes and sizes, most with several parchment scrolls thrust into them, and it was somehow very clear that McGonagall knew exactly what every cubbyhole meant, even if no one else
did. A single parchment lay on the actual desk, which was, aside from
that, clean. Behind the desk was a closed door barred with several locks.
McGonagall was sitting on a backless stool behind the desk, looking
puzzled—her eyes had widened slightly, with perhaps a slight note of
apprehension, as they saw Harry.
“Mr. Potter?” said Professor McGonagall. “I wasn’t expecting you
here. What is this about?”
Harry’s mind went blank. He’d been instructed by the game to come
here, he had been expecting her to have something in mind...

“C

*

191

*

**
*

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

*
*

*

“Mr. Potter?” said Professor McGonagall, starting to look slightly
annoyed.
Thankfully, Harry’s panicking brain remembered at this point that
he did have something he’d been planning to discuss with Professor
McGonagall. Something important and well worth her time.
“Um...” Harry said. “If there are any spells you can cast to make sure
no one’s listening to us...”
Professor McGonagall stood up from her chair, ﬁrmly closed the
outer door, and began taking out her wand and saying spells.
It was at this point that Harry realized he was faced with a priceless
and possibly irreplaceable opportunity to oﬀer Professor McGonagall a
Comed-Tea and he couldn’t believe he was seriously thinking that and it
would be ﬁne the soda would vanish after a few seconds and he told that
part of himself to shut up.
It did, and Harry began to organize mentally what he was going to
say. He hadn’t planned to have this discussion quite so soon, but so long
as he was here...
Professor McGonagall ﬁnished a spell that sounded a lot older than
Latin, and then she sat down again.
“All right,” she said in a quiet voice. “No one’s listening.” Her face
was rather tight.
Oh, right, she’s expecting me to blackmail her for information about the
prophecy.
Eh, Harry’d get around to that some other day.
“It’s about the Incident with the Sorting Hat,” Harry said. (Professor McGonagall blinked.) “Um... I think there’s an extra spell on the
Sorting Hat, something that the Sorting Hat itself doesn’t know about,
something that triggers when the Sorting Hat says Slytherin. I heard a
message that I’m pretty sure Ravenclaws aren’t supposed to hear. It came
the moment the Sorting Hat was oﬀ my head and I felt the connection
break. It sounded like a hiss and like English at the same time,” there
was a sharp intake of breath from McGonagall, “and it said: Salutations
from Slytherin to Slytherin, if you would seek my secrets, speak to my
snake.”
Professor McGonagall sat there with her mouth open, staring at
*

192

*

**
*

THE UNKNOWN AND THE UNKNOWABLE

*
*

*

Harry as if he’d grown another two heads.
“So...” Professor McGonagall said slowly, as though she couldn’t believe the words that were coming out of her own lips, “you decided to
come to me right away and tell me about it.”
“Well, yes, of course,” Harry said. There was no need to admit how
long it had taken him to actually think of that. “As opposed to, say,
trying to research it myself, or telling any of the other children.”
“I... see,” Professor McGonagall said. “And if, say, you were to discover the entrance to Salazar Slytherin’s legendary Chamber of Secrets,
an entrance that you and you alone could open...”
“I would close the entrance and report to you at once so that a team
of experienced magical archaeologists could be assembled,” Harry said
promptly. “Then I would open up the entrance again and they would go
in very carefully to make sure that there was nothing dangerous. I might
go in later to look around, or if they needed me to open up something
else, but it would be after the area had been declared clear and they had
photographs of how everything looked before people started tromping
around their priceless historical site.”
Professor McGonagall sat there with her mouth open, staring at him
like he’d just turned into a cat.
“It’s obvious if you’re not a Gryﬃndor,” Harry said kindly.
“I think,” Professor McGonagall said in a rather choked voice, “that
you far underestimate the rarity of common sense, Mr. Potter.”
That sounded about right. Although... “A Huﬄepuﬀ would’ve said
the same thing.”
McGonagall paused, struck. “That’s true.”
“Sorting Hat oﬀered me Huﬄepuﬀ.”
She blinked at him as though she couldn’t believe her own ears. “Did
it really?”
“Yes.”
“Mr. Potter,” McGonagall said, and now her voice was very low, “ﬁve
decades ago was the last time a student died within the walls of Hogwarts,
and I am now certain that ﬁve decades ago was the last time someone
heard that message.”
A chill went through Harry. “Then I will be very sure to take no ac*

193

*

**
*

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

*
*

*

tion whatsoever on this matter without consulting you, Professor McGonagall.” He paused. “And may I suggest that you get together the best
people you can ﬁnd and see if it’s possible to get that extra spell oﬀ the
Sorting Hat... and if you can’t do that, maybe put on another spell, a
Quietus Charm that brieﬂy activates just as the Hat is being removed
from a student’s head, that might work as a patch. There, no more dead
students.” Harry nodded in satisfaction.
Professor McGonagall looked even more stunned, if such a thing
were imaginable. “I cannot possibly award you enough points for this
without giving the House Cup to Ravenclaw outright.”
“Um,” Harry said. “Um. I’d rather not earn that many House
points.”
Now Professor McGonagall was giving him a strange look. “Why
not?”
Harry was having a little diﬃculty putting it into words. “Because it
would be just too sad, you know? Like... like back when I was still trying
to go to school in the Muggle world, and whenever there was a group
project, I’d go ahead and do the whole thing myself because the others
would only slow me down. I’m ﬁne with earning lots of points, more
than anyone else even, but if I earn enough to be decisive in winning the
House Cup just by myself, then it’s like I’m carrying House Ravenclaw
on my back and that’s too sad.”
“I see...” McGonagall said hesitantly. It was apparent that this way of
thinking had never occurred to her. “Suppose I only awarded you ﬁfty
points, then?”
Harry shook his head again. “It’s not fair to the other children if
I earn lots of points for grownup things that I can be part of and they
can’t. How is Terry Boot supposed to earn ﬁfty points for reporting a
whisper he heard from the Sorting Hat? It wouldn’t be fair at all.”
“I see why the Sorting Hat oﬀered you Huﬄepuﬀ,” said Professor
McGonagall. She was eyeing him with a strange respect.
That made Harry choke up a bit. He’d honestly thought he wasn’t
worthy of Huﬄepuﬀ. That the Sorting Hat had just been trying to shove
him anywhere but Ravenclaw, into a House whose virtues he didn’t
have...
*

194

*

**
*

THE UNKNOWN AND THE UNKNOWABLE

*
*

*

Professor McGonagall was smiling now. “And if I tried to give you
ten points...?”
“Are you going to explain where those ten points came from, if anyone asks? There might be a lot of Slytherins, and I don’t mean the children at Hogwarts, who would be really really really angry if they knew
about the spell being taken oﬀ the Sorting Hat and found out that I was
involved. So I think that absolute secrecy is the better part of valor. No
need to thank me, ma’am, virtue is its own reward.”
“So it is,” Professor McGonagall said, “but I do have a very special
something else to give you. I see that I have greatly wronged you in my
thoughts, Mr. Potter. Please wait here.”
She got up, went over to the locked back door, waved her wand, and a
sort of blurry curtain sprang up around her. Harry could neither see nor
hear what was going on. It was a few minutes later that the blur vanished
and Professor McGonagall was standing there, facing him, with the door
behind her looking as though it hadn’t ever been opened.
And Professor McGonagall held out in one hand a necklace, a thin
golden chain bearing in its center a silver circle, within which was the
device of an hourglass. In her other hand was a folded pamphlet. “This
is for you,” she said.
Wow! He was going to get some sort of neat magical item as a quest
reward! Apparently that business with refusing oﬀers of monetary rewards until you got a magic item actually worked in real life, not just
computer games.
Harry accepted his new necklace, smiling. “What is it?”
Professor McGonagall took a breath. “Mr. Potter, this is an item
which is ordinarily lent only to children who have already shown themselves to be highly responsible, in order to help them with diﬃcult class
schedules.” McGonagall hesitated, as though about to add something
else. “I must emphasize, Mr. Potter, that this item’s true nature is secret and that you must not tell any of the other students about it, or let
them see you using it. If that’s not acceptable to you, then you can give
it back now.”
“I can keep secrets,” Harry said. “So what does it do?”
“So far as the other students are concerned, this is a Spimster wicket
*

195

*

**
*

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

*
*

*

and it is used to treat a rare, non-contagious magical ailment called Spontaneous Duplication. You wear it under your clothes, and while you
have no reason to show it to anyone, you also have no reason to treat it
as an awful secret. Spimster wickets are not interesting. Do you understand, Mr. Potter?”
Harry nodded, his smile widening. He sensed the work of a competent Slytherin. “And what does it really do?”
“It’s a Time-Turner. Each spin of the hourglass sends you one hour
back in time. So if you use it to go back two hours every day, you should
always be able to get to sleep at the same time.”
Harry’s suspension of disbelief blew completely out the window.
You’re giving me a time machine to treat my sleep disorder.
You’re giving me a time machine to treat my sleep disorder.
You’re GIVING ME A TIME MACHINE in order to TREAT MY
SLEEP DISORDER.
“Ehehehehhheheh...” Harry’s mouth said. He was now holding the
necklace away from him as though it were a live bomb. Well, no, not
as if it were a live bomb, that didn’t begin to describe the severity of the
situation. Harry held the necklace away from him as though it were a
time machine.
Say, Professor McGonagall, did you know that time-reversed ordinary
matter looks just like antimatter? Why yes it does! Did you know that one
kilogram of antimatter encountering one kilogram of matter will annihilate
in an explosion equivalent to 43 million tons of tnt? Do you realize that I
myself weigh 41 kilograms and that the resulting blast would leave a giant
smoking crater where there used to be Scotland?
“Excuse me,” Harry managed to say, “but this sounds really really
really really dangerous!” Harry’s voice didn’t quite rise to a shriek, he
couldn’t possibly scream loud enough to do this situation justice so there
was no point in trying.
Professor McGonagall looked upon him with tolerant aﬀection.
“I’m glad you’re taking this seriously, Mr. Potter, but Time-Turners
aren’t that dangerous. We wouldn’t give them to children if they were.”
“Really,” Harry said. “Ahahahaha. Of course you wouldn’t give time
machines to children if they were dangerous, what was I thinking? So
*

196

*

**
*

THE UNKNOWN AND THE UNKNOWABLE

*
*

*

just to be clear, sneezing on this device will not send me into the Middle
Ages where I will run over Gutenberg with a horse cart and prevent the
Enlightenment? Because, you know, I hate it when that happens to me.”
McGonagall’s lips were twitching in that way she had when she was
trying not to smile. She oﬀered Harry the pamphlet she was holding, but
Harry was carefully holding out the necklace with both hands and staring at the hourglass to make sure it wasn’t about to turn. “Don’t worry,”
McGonagall said after a momentary pause, when it became clear that
Harry wasn’t going to move, “that can’t possibly happen, Mr. Potter.
The Time-Turner cannot be used to move more than six hours backward. It can’t be used more than six times in any day.”
“Oh, good, very good, that. And if someone bumps into me the
Time-Turner will not break and will not trap the whole castle of Hogwarts in an endlessly repeating loop of Thursdays.”
“Well, they can be fragile...” said McGonagall. “And I do think I’ve
heard about strange things happening if they’re broken. But nothing
like that!”
“Perhaps,” Harry said when he could speak again, “you ought to
provide your time machines with some sort of protective shell, rather
than leaving the glass exposed, so as to prevent that from happening.”
McGonagall looked quite struck. “That’s an excellent idea, Mr. Potter. I shall inform the Ministry of it.”
That’s it, it’s oﬃcial now, they’ve ratiﬁed it in Parliament, everyone in
the wizarding world is completely stupid.
“And while I hate to get all philosophical,” Harry desperately tried
to lower his voice to something under a shriek, “has anyone thought
about the implications of going back six hours and doing something that
changes time which would pretty much delete all the people affected
and replace them with different versions—”
“Oh, you can’t change time!” Professor McGonagall interrupted.
“Good heavens, Mr. Potter, do you think these would be allowed students if that was possible? What if someone tried to change their test
scores?”
Harry took a moment to process this. His hands relaxed, just a little,
from their white grip on the hourglass chain. Like he wasn’t holding a
*

197

*

**
*

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

*
*

*

time machine, just a live nuclear warhead.
“So...” Harry said slowly. “People just ﬁnd that the universe... happens to be self-consistent, somehow, even though it has time-travel in
it. If I and my future self interact then I’ll see the same thing as both
of me, even though, on my own ﬁrst run through, my future self is already acting in full knowledge of things that, from my own perspective,
haven’t happened yet...” Harry’s voice trailed oﬀ into the inadequacy of
English.
“Correct, I think,” said Professor McGonagall. “Although wizards
are advised to avoid being seen by their past selves. If you’re attending
two classes at the same time and you need to cross paths with yourself,
for example, the ﬁrst version of you should step aside and close his eyes
at a known time—you have a watch already, good—so that the future
you can pass. It’s all there in the pamphlet.”
“Ahahahaa. And what happens when someone ignores that advice?”
Professor McGonagall pursed her lips. “I understand that it can be
quite disconcerting.”
“And it doesn’t, say, create a paradox that destroys the universe.”
She smiled tolerantly. “Mr. Potter, I think I’d remember hearing if
that had ever happened.”
“That is not reassuring! Haven’t you people ever heard of anthropic bias? And what idiot ever built one of these things for the
first time?”
Professor McGonagall actually laughed. It was a pleasant, glad sound
that seemed surprisingly out of place on that stern face. “You’re having
another ‘you turned into a cat’ moment, aren’t you, Mr. Potter. You
probably don’t want to hear this, but it’s quite endearingly cute.”
“Turning into a cat doesn’t even begin to compare to this. You know
right up until this moment I had this awful suppressed thought somewhere in the back of my mind that the only remaining answer was that
my whole universe was a computer simulation like in the book Simulacron 3 but now even that is ruled out because this little toy isn’t Turing
computable! A Turing machine could simulate going back into a deﬁned
moment of the past and computing a diﬀerent future from there, an oracle machine could rely on the halting behavior of lower-order machines,
*

198

*

**
*

THE UNKNOWN AND THE UNKNOWABLE

*
*

*

but what you’re saying is that reality somehow self-consistently computes in one sweep using information that hasn’t... happened... yet...”
Realization struck Harry a pile-driver blow.
It all made sense now. It all ﬁnally made sense.
“So that’s how the Comed-Tea works! Of course! The spell doesn’t
force funny events to happen, it just makes you feel an impulse to drink
right before funny things are going to happen anyway! I’m such a fool,
I should have realized when I felt the impulse to drink the Comed-Tea
before Dumbledore’s second speech, didn’t drink it, and then choked
on my own saliva instead—drinking the Comed-Tea doesn’t cause the
comedy, the comedy causes you to drink the Comed-Tea! I saw the
two events were correlated and assumed the Comed-Tea had to be the
cause and the comedy had to be the eﬀect because I thought temporal
order restrained causation and causal graphs had to be acyclic but it all
makes sense once you draw the causal arrows going BACKWARDS IN
TIME!”
Realization struck Harry the second pile-driver.
This one he managed to keep quiet, making only a small strangling
sound like a dying kitten as he realized who’d put the note on his bed
this morning.
Professor McGonagall’s eyes were alight. “After you graduate, or
possibly even before, you really must teach some of these Muggle theories at Hogwarts, Mr. Potter. They sound quite fascinating, even if
they’re all wrong.”
“Glehhahhh...”
Professor McGonagall oﬀered him a few more pleasantries, demanded a few more promises to which Harry nodded, said something
about not talking to snakes where anyone could hear him, reminded him
to read the pamphlet, and then somehow Harry found himself standing
outside her oﬃce with the door closed ﬁrmly behind him.
“Gaahhhrrrraa...” Harry said.
Why yes his mind was blown.
Not least by the fact that, if not for the Prank, he might well have
never obtained a Time-Turner in the ﬁrst place.
Or would Professor McGonagall have given it to him anyway, only
*

199 *

**
*

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

*
*

*

later in the day, whenever he got around to asking about his sleep disorder or telling her about the Sorting Hat’s message? And would he, at
that time, have wanted to pull a prank on himself which would have led
to him getting the Time-Turner earlier? So that the only self-consistent
possibility was the one in which the Prank started before he even woke
up in the morning...?
Harry found himself considering, for the ﬁrst time in his life, that
the answer to his question might be literally inconceivable. That since
his own brain contained neurons that only ran forward in time, there
was nothing his brain could do, no operation it could perform, which
was conjugate to the operation of a Time Turner.
Up until this point Harry had lived by the admonition of E. T. Jaynes
that if you were ignorant about a phenomenon, that was a fact about
your own state of mind, not a fact about the phenomenon itself; that
your uncertainty was a fact about you, not a fact about whatever you
were uncertain about; that ignorance existed in the mind, not in reality;
that a blank map did not correspond to a blank territory. There were
mysterious questions, but a mysterious answer was a contradiction in
terms. A phenomenon could be mysterious to some particular person,
but there could be no phenomena mysterious of themselves. To worship
a sacred mystery was just to worship your own ignorance.
So Harry had looked upon magic and refused to be intimidated.
People had no sense of history, they learned about chemistry and biology and astronomy and thought that these matters had always been
the proper meat of science, that they had never been mysterious. The
stars had once been mysteries. Lord Kelvin had once called the nature
of life and biology—the response of muscles to human will and the generation of trees from seeds—a mystery “inﬁnitely beyond” the reach of
science. (Not just a little beyond, mind you, but inﬁnitely beyond. Lord
Kelvin sure had gotten a big emotional kick out of not knowing something.) Every mystery ever solved had been a puzzle from the dawn of
the human species right up until someone solved it.
Now, for the ﬁrst time, he was up against the prospect of a mystery
that was threatening to be permanent. If Time didn’t work by acyclic
causal networks then Harry didn’t understand what was meant by cause
*

200 *

**
*

THE UNKNOWN AND THE UNKNOWABLE

*
*

*

and eﬀect; and if Harry didn’t understand causes and eﬀects then he
didn’t understand what sort of stuﬀ reality might be made of instead;
and it was entirely possible that his human mind never could understand,
because his brain was made of old-fashioned linear-time neurons, and this
had turned out to be an impoverished subset of reality.
On the plus side, the Comed-Tea, which had once seemed allpowerful and all-unbelievable, had turned out to have a much simpler explanation. Which he’d missed merely because the truth was completely
outside his hypothesis space or anything that his brain had evolved to
comprehend. But now he actually had gotten it, probably. Which was
sort of encouraging. Sort of.
Harry glanced down at his watch. It was nearly 11am, he’d gotten to
sleep last night at 1am, so in the natural state of aﬀairs he’d go to sleep
tonight at 3am. So to go to sleep at 10pm and wake up at 7am, he should
go back ﬁve hours total. Which meant that if he wanted to get back to
his dorm at around 6am, before anyone was awake, he’d better hurry up
and...
Even in retrospect Harry didn’t understand how he’d pulled oﬀ half
the stuﬀ involved in the Prank. Where had the pie come from?
Harry was starting to seriously fear time travel.
On the other hand, he had to admit that it had been an irreplaceable
opportunity. A prank you could only pull on yourself once in a lifetime,
within six hours of when you ﬁrst found out about Time-Turners.
In fact that was even more puzzling, when Harry thought about it.
Time had presented him with the ﬁnished Prank as a fait accompli, and
yet it was, quite clearly, his own handiwork. Concept and execution and
writing style. Every last part, even the ones he still didn’t understand.
Well, time was a-wasting and there were at most thirty hours in a day.
Harry did know some of what he had to do, and he might ﬁgure out the
rest, like the pie, while he was working. There was no point putting it
oﬀ. He couldn’t exactly accomplish anything stuck here in the future.

**
*
*

201 *

**
*

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

*
*

*

Five hours earlier, Harry was sneaking into his dorm with his robes
pulled up over his head as a thin sort of disguise, just in case someone
was already up and about and saw him at the same time as Harry lying
in his bed. He didn’t want to have to explain to anyone about his little
medical problem with Spontaneous Duplication.
Fortunately it seemed that everyone was still asleep.
And there also seemed to be a box, wrapped in red and green paper
with a bright golden ribbon, lying next to his bed. The perfect, stereotypical image of a Christmas present, although it wasn’t Christmas.
Harry crept in as softly as he could manage, just in case someone had
their Quieter turned down low.
There was an envelope attached to the box, closed by plain clear wax
without a seal impressed.
Harry carefully pried the envelope open, and took out the letter inside.
The letter said:

This is the Cloak of Invisibility of Ignotus Peverell, passed down
through his descendants the Potters. Unlike lesser cloaks and spells it
has the power to keep you hidden, not just invisible, though you would
still be well advised to learn the Quietus Charm. Your father lent it
to me to study shortly before he died, and I confess that I have received
much good use of it over the years.
In the future I shall have to get along with Disillusionment, I fear.
It is time the Cloak was returned to you, its heir. I had thought to
make this a Christmas present, but it wished to come back to your
hand before then. It seems to expect you to have need of it. Use it
well.
No doubt you are already thinking of all manner of wonderful
pranks, as your father committed in his day. If his full misdeeds were
known, every woman in Gryﬃndor would gather to desecrate his
grave. I shall not try to stop history from repeating, but be most careful not to reveal yourself. If Dumbledore realized that you possessed
*

202 *

**
*

THE UNKNOWN AND THE UNKNOWABLE

*
*

*

one of the Deathly Hallows he would certainly never allow it out of
his grasp.
A Very Merry Christmas to you.

The note was unsigned.

**
*
“Hold on,” Harry said, pulling up short as the other boys were about to
leave the Ravenclaw dorm. “Sorry, there’s something else I’ve got to do
with my trunk. I’ll be along to breakfast in a couple of minutes.”
Terry Boot scowled at Harry. “You’d better not be planning to go
through any of our things.”
Harry held up one hand. “I swear that I intend to do nothing of the
sort to any of your things, that I only intend to access objects that I myself own, that I have no pranking or otherwise questionable intentions
toward any of you, and that I do not anticipate those intentions changing
before I get to breakfast in the Great Hall.”
Terry frowned. “Wait, is that—”
“Don’t worry,” said Penelope Clearwater, who was there to guide
them. “There were no loopholes. Well-worded, Potter, you should be a
lawyer.”
Harry Potter blinked at that. Ah, yes, Ravenclaw prefect. “Thank
you,” he said. “I think.”
“When you try to ﬁnd the Great Hall, you will get lost.” Penelope
stated this in the tones of a ﬂat, unarguable fact. “As soon as you do,
ask a portrait how to get to the ﬁrst ﬂoor. Ask another portrait the
instant you suspect you might be lost again. Especially if it seems like
you’re going up higher and higher. If you are higher than the whole
castle ought to be, stop and wait for search parties. Otherwise we shall
see you again three months later and you will be two years older and
dressed in a loincloth and covered in snow and that’s if you stay inside the
castle.”
*

203 *

**
*

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

*
*

*

“Understood,” said Harry, swallowing hard. “Um, shouldn’t you tell
students all that sort of stuﬀ right away?”
Penelope sighed. “What, all that stuﬀ? That would take weeks.
You’ll pick it up as you go along.” She turned to go, followed by the
other students. “If I don’t see you at breakfast in thirty minutes, Potter,
I’ll start the search.”
Once everyone was gone, Harry attached the note to his bed—he’d
already written it and all the other notes, working in his cavern level
before everyone else woke up. Then he carefully reached inside the Quietus ﬁeld and pulled the Cloak of Invisibility oﬀ Harry-’s still-sleeping
form.
And just for the sake of mischief, Harry put the Cloak into Harry’s pouch, knowing it would thereby already be in his own.

**
*
“I can see that the message is passed on to Cornelion Flubberwalt,” said
the painting of a man with aristocratic airs and, in fact, a perfectly normal nose. “But might I ask where it came from originally?”
Harry shrugged with artful helplessness. “I was told that it was spoken by a hollow voice that belled forth from a gap within the air itself,
a gap that opened upon a ﬁery abyss.”

**
*
“Hey!” Hermione said in tones of indignation from her place on the
other side of the breakfast table. “That’s everyone’s dessert! You can’t
just take one whole pie and put it in your pouch!”
“I’m not taking one pie, I’m taking two. Sorry everyone, gotta run
now!” Harry ignored the cries of outrage and left the Great Hall. He
needed to arrive at Herbology class a little early.

**
*
*

204 *

**
*

THE UNKNOWN AND THE UNKNOWABLE

*
*

*

Professor Sprout eyed him sharply. “And how do you know what the
Slytherins are planning?”
“I can’t name my source,” Harry said. “In fact I have to ask you
to pretend that this conversation never happened. Just act like you happened across them naturally while you were on an errand, or something.
I’ll run on ahead as soon as Herbology gets out. I think I can distract the
Slytherins until you get there. I’m not easy to scare or bully, and I don’t
think they’ll dare to seriously hurt the Boy-Who-Lived. Though... I’m
not asking you to run in the hallways, but I would appreciate it if you
didn’t dawdle along the way.”
Professor Sprout looked at him for a long moment, then her expression softened. “Please be careful with yourself, Harry Potter. And...
thank you.”
“Just be sure not to be late,” Harry said. “And remember, when you
get there, you weren’t expecting to see me and this conversation never
happened.”

**
*
It was horrible, watching himself yank Neville out of the circle of
Slytherins. Neville had been right, he’d used too much force, way too
much force.
“Hello,” Harry Potter said coldly. “I’m the Boy-Who-Lived.”
Eight ﬁrst-year boys, mostly the same height. One of them had a
scar on his forehead and he wasn’t acting like the others.
Oh wad some Pow’r the giftie gie us
To see oursels as others see us!
It wad frae mony a blunder free us,
An’ foolish notion—
Professor McGonagall was right. The Sorting Hat was right. It was
clear once you saw it from the outside.
There was something wrong with Harry Potter.

*

205 *

CHAPTER

FIFTEEN

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS
“I’m sure I’ll ﬁnd the time somewhere.”

**
*
rigideiro!”
Harry dipped a ﬁnger in the glass of water on his desk. It ought
to have been cool. But lukewarm it had been, and lukewarm it had
stayed. Again.
Harry was feeling very, very cheated.
There were hundreds of fantasy novels scattered around the Verres
household. Harry had read quite a few. And it was starting to look like
he had a mysterious dark side. So after the glass of water had refused
to cooperate the ﬁrst few times, Harry had glanced around the Charms
classroom to make sure no one was watching, taken a deep breath, focused, and made himself angry. Thought about the Slytherins bullying
Neville, and the game where someone knocked down your books every time you tried to pick them up again. Thought about what Draco
Malfoy had said about the ten-year-old Lovegood girl and how the Wizengamot really operated...
And the fury had entered his blood, he had held out his wand in a
hand that trembled with hate and said in cold tones “Frigideiro!” and
absolutely nothing had happened.

“F

*

207 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

*
*

*

Harry had been gypped. He wanted to write someone and demand a
refund on his dark side which clearly ought to have irresistable magical
power but had turned out to be defective.
“Frigideiro!” said Hermione again from the desk next to him. Her
water was solid ice and there were white crystals forming on the rim of
her glass. She seemed to be totally focused on her own work and not
at all conscious of the other students in class staring at her with hateful
eyes, which was either (a) dangerously oblivious of her or (b) a perfectly
honed performance rising to the level of ﬁne art.
“Oh, very good, Miss Granger!” squeaked Filius Flitwick, their
Charms professor and Head of Ravenclaw, a tiny little man with no visible signs of being a past dueling champion. “Excellent! Stupendous!”
Harry had expected to be, in the worst case, second behind Hermione. Harry would have preferred for her to be rivaling him, of course,
but he could have accepted it the other way around.
As of Monday, Harry was headed for the bottom of the class, a position for which he was companionably rivaling all the other Muggleraised students except Hermione. Who was all alone and rivalless at the
top, poor thing.
Professor Flitwick was standing over the desk of one of the other
Muggleborns and quietly adjusting the way she was holding her wand.
Harry looked over at Hermione. He swallowed hard. It was the
obvious role for her in the scheme of things... “Hermione?” Harry said
tentatively. “Do you have any idea what I might be doing wrong?”
Hermione’s eyes lit up with a terrible light of helpfulness and something in the back of Harry’s brain screamed in desperate humiliation.
Five minutes later, Harry’s water did seem noticeably cooler than
room temperature and Hermione had given him a few verbal pats on
the head and told him to pronounce it more carefully next time and
gone oﬀ to help someone else.
Professor Flitwick had given her a House point for helping him.
Harry was gritting his teeth so hard his jaw ached and that wasn’t
helping his pronunciation.
I don’t care if it’s unfair competition. I know exactly what I am doing
with two extra hours every day. I am going to sit in my trunk and study
*

208 *

**
*

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS

*
*

*

until I am keeping up with Hermione.

**
*
“Transﬁguration is some of the most complex and dangerous magic you
will learn at Hogwarts,” said Professor McGonagall. There was not the
slightest trace of a smile on the face of the stern old witch. “Anyone
messing around in my class will leave and not come back. You have
been warned.”
Her wand came down and tapped her desk, which smoothly reshaped
itself into a pig. A couple of Muggleborn students gave out small yelps.
The pig looked around and snorted, seeming confused, and then became
a desk again.
McGonagall looked around the class. Her eyes settled on one person.
“Mr. Potter,” said Professor McGonagall. “You only got your schoolbooks a few days ago. Have you started reading your Transﬁguration
textbook?”
“No, sorry professor,” Harry said.
“You needn’t apologize, Mr. Potter, if you were required to read
ahead you would have been told to do so.” McGonagall’s ﬁngers rapped
the desk in front of her. “Mr. Potter, would you care to guess whether
this is a desk which I brieﬂy Transﬁgured into a pig, or if it began as a
pig and I brieﬂy removed the Transﬁguration? If you had read the ﬁrst
chapter of your textbook, you would know.”
Harry’s eyebrows furrowed slightly. “I’d guess it’d be easier to start
with a pig, since if it started as a desk, it might not know how to stand
up.”
Professor McGonagall shook her head. “No fault to you, Mr. Potter,
but the correct answer is that in Transﬁguration class you do not care to
guess. Wrong answers will be graded with extreme severity, questions
left blank will be graded with great leniency. You must learn to know
what you do not know. If I ask you any question, no matter how obvious
or basic, and you answer ‘I’m not sure’, I will not hold it against you and
*

209 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

*
*

*

anyone who laughs will lose House points. Can you tell me why this
rule exists, Mr. Potter?”
Because a single error in Transﬁguration can be incredibly dangerous.
“No.”
“Correct. Transﬁguration is even more dangerous than Apparition,
which is not taught until your sixth year. Unfortunately, Transﬁguration
must be learned and practiced at a young age in order to maximize your
adult ability. So this is a dangerous subject, and you should be quite
scared of making any mistakes, because none of my students have ever
been permanently injured and I will be extremely put out if you are the
ﬁrst class to spoil my record.”
Several students gulped.
Professor McGonagall stood up and moved over to the wall behind
her desk, which held a whiteboard, complete with markers and eraser.
“There are many reasons why Transﬁguration is dangerous, but one
reason stands above all the rest.” She took up one of the markers and
sketched letters in bright red, which she then underlined in blue:

I

TRANSFIGURATION IS NOT PERMANENT!
“Transﬁguration is not permanent!” said McGonagall. “Transﬁguration is not permanent! Transﬁguration is not permanent! Mr. Potter,
suppose a student Transﬁgured a block of wood into a glass of water,
and you drank it. What do you imagine might happen to you when the
Transﬁguration wore oﬀ?” There was a pause. “Excuse me, I should not
have asked that of you, Mr. Potter, I forgot that you are blessed with an
unusually pessimistic imagination—”
“I’m ﬁne,” Harry said, swallowing hard. “So the ﬁrst answer is that
I don’t know,” McGonagall nodded, “but I imagine there might be...
wood in my stomach, and in my bloodstream, and if any of that water
had gotten absorbed into my body’s tissues—would it be wood pulp or
solid wood or...” Harry’s grasp of magic failed him. He couldn’t understand how wood mapped into water in the ﬁrst place, so he couldn’t understand what would happen after the water molecules were scrambled
*

210

*

**
*

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS

*
*

*

by ordinary thermal motions and the magic wore oﬀ and the mapping
reversed.
McGonagall’s face was stiﬀ. “As Mr. Potter has correctly reasoned, he
would become extremely sick and require emergency medical attention.
Please turn your textbooks to page 5.”
Even without any sound in the moving picture, you could tell that
the woman with horribly discolored skin was screaming.
“The criminal who originally Transﬁgured gold into wine and gave
it to this woman to drink, ‘in payment of the debt’ as he put it, received
a sentence of ten years in Azkaban. Please turn to page 6. That is a
Dementor. They are the guardians of Azkaban. They suck away at your
magic, your life, and any happy thoughts you try to have. The picture
on page 7 is of the criminal ten years later, on his release. You will note
that he is dead—yes, Mr. Potter?”
“Professor,” Harry said, “if the worst happens in a case like that, is
there any way of maintaining the Transﬁguration?”
“No,” Professor McGonagall said ﬂatly. “Sustaining a Transﬁguration is a constant drain on your magic which scales with the size of
the target form. And you would need to recontact the target every few
hours, which is, in a case like this, impossible. Disasters like this are
unrecoverable!”
Professor McGonagall leaned forward. Her face was very hard. “You
will absolutely never under any circumstances Transﬁgure anything into
a liquid or a gas. No water, no air. Nothing like water, nothing like air.
Even if it is not meant to drink. Liquid evaporates, little bits and pieces
of it get into the air. You will not Transﬁgure anything that is to be
burned. It will make smoke and someone could breathe that smoke!
You will never Transﬁgure anything that could conceivably get inside
anyone’s body by any means. No food. Nothing that looks like food.
Not even as a funny little prank where you intend to tell them about
your mud pie before they actually eat it. You will never do it. Period.
Inside this classroom or out of it or anywhere. Is that well understood
by every single student?”
“Yes,” said Harry, Hermione, and a few others. The rest seemed to
be speechless.
*

211

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

*
*

*

“Is that well understood by every single student?”
“Yes,” they said or muttered or whispered.
“If you break any of these rules you will not further study Transﬁguration during your stay at Hogwarts. Repeat along with me. I will never
Transﬁgure anything into liquid or gas.”
“I will never Transﬁgure anything into liquid or gas,” said the students in ragged chorus.
“Again! Louder! I will never Transﬁgure anything into liquid or gas.”
“I will never Transﬁgure anything into liquid or gas.”
“I will never Transﬁgure anything that looks like food or anything
else that goes inside a human body.”
“I will never Transﬁgure anything that is to be burned because it
could make smoke.”
“You will never Transﬁgure anything that looks like money, including Muggle money,” said Professor McGonagall. “The goblins have ways
of ﬁnding out who did it. As a matter of recognized law, the goblin nation is in a permanent state of war with all magical counterfeiters. They
will not send Aurors. They will send an army.”
“I will never Transﬁgure anything that looks like money,” chorused
the students.
“And above all,” said Professor McGonagall, “you will not Transﬁgure any living subject, especially yourselves. It will make you very sick and
possibly dead, depending on how you Transﬁgure yourself and how long
you maintain the change.” Professor McGonagall paused. “Mr. Potter is
currently holding up a questioning hand because he has seen an Animagus transformation—in particular, a human transforming into a cat
and back again. But an Animagus transformation is not free Transﬁguration.”
Professor McGonagall took a small piece of wood out of her pocket.
With a tap of her wand it became a glass ball. Then she said “Crystferrium!” and the glass ball became a steel ball. She tapped it with her
wand one last time and the steel ball became a piece of wood once more.
“Crystferrium transforms a subject of solid glass into a similarly shaped
target of solid steel. It cannot do the reverse, and it cannot transform a
desk into a pig, either. The most general form of Transﬁguration—free
*

212

*

**
*

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS

*
*

*

Transﬁguration, which is what you will be learning here—is capable of
transforming any subject into any target, at least so far as physical form
is concerned. For this reason, free Transﬁguration must be done wordlessly. Using Charms would require diﬀerent words for every diﬀerent
transformation between subject and target.”
Professor McGonagall gave her students a sharp look. “Some teachers
begin with Transﬁguration Charms and move on to free Transﬁguration
afterward. Yes, that would be much easier in the beginning. But it can
set you in a poor mold which impairs your abilities later. Here you will
learn free Transﬁguration from the very start, which requires that you
cast the spell wordlessly, by holding the subject form, the target form,
and the transformation within your own mind.”
“And to answer Mr. Potter’s question,” Professor McGonagall went
on, “it is free Transﬁguration which you must never do to any living
subject. There are Charms and potions which can safely, reversibly
transform living subjects in limited ways. An Animagus with a missing limb will still be missing that limb after transforming, for example.
Free Transﬁguration is not safe. Your body will change while it is Transﬁgured—breathing, for example, results in a constant loss of the body’s
matter to the atmosphere. When the Transﬁguration wears oﬀ and your
body tries to revert to its original form, it will not quite be able to do
so. If you press your wand to your body and imagine yourself with
golden hair, afterward your hair will fall out. If you visualize yourself as
someone with clearer skin, you will be taking a long stay at St. Mungo’s.
And if you Transﬁgure yourself into an adult bodily form, then, when
the Transﬁguration wears oﬀ, you will die.”
That explained why he had seen such things as fat boys, or girls less
than perfectly pretty. Or old people, for that matter. That wouldn’t
happen if you could just Transﬁgure yourself every morning... Harry
raised his hand and tried to signal Professor McGonagall with his eyes.
“Yes, Mr. Potter?”
“Is it possible to Transﬁgure a living subject into a target that is static,
such as a coin—no, excuse me, I’m terribly sorry, let’s just say a steel
ball.”
Professor McGonagall shook her head. “Mr. Potter, even inanimate
*

213

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

*
*

*

objects undergo tiny internal changes over time. There would be no
visible changes to your body afterward, and for the ﬁrst minute, you
would notice nothing wrong. But in an hour you would be very sick,
and a day later you would be dead.”
“Erm, excuse me, so if I’d read the ﬁrst chapter I could have guessed
that the desk was originally a desk and not a pig,” Harry said, “but only
if I made the further assumption that you didn’t want to kill the pig, that
might seem highly probable but—”
“I can foresee that grading your tests will be an endless source of
delight to me, Mr. Potter. But if you have other questions can I please
ask you to wait until after class?”
“No further questions, Professor.”
“Now repeat after me,” said Professor McGonagall. “I will never try
to Transﬁgure any living subject, especially myself, unless speciﬁcally
instructed to do so using a specialized Charm or potion.”
“If I am not sure whether a Transﬁguration is safe, I will not try it
until I have asked Professor McGonagall or Professor Flitwick or Professor Snape or Headmaster Dumbledore, who are the only recognized
authorities on Transﬁguration at Hogwarts. Asking another student is
not acceptable, even if they say that they remember asking the same question.”
“Even if the current Defense Professor at Hogwarts tells me that a
Transﬁguration is safe, and even if I see the Defense Professor do it and
nothing bad seems to happen, I will not try it myself.”
“I have the absolute right to refuse to perform any Transﬁguration
about which I feel the slightest bit nervous. Since not even the Headmaster of Hogwarts can order me to do otherwise, I certainly will not
accept any such order from the Defense Professor, even if the Defense
Professor threatens to deduct one hundred House points and have me
expelled.”
“If I break any of these rules I will not further study Transﬁguration
during my time at Hogwarts.”
“We will repeat these rules at the start of every class for the ﬁrst
month,” said Professor McGonagall. “And now, we will begin with
matches as subjects and needles as targets... put away your wands, thank
*

214

*

**
*

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS

*
*

*

you, by ‘begin’ I meant that you will begin taking notes.”
Half an hour before the end of class, Professor McGonagall handed
out the matches.
At the end of the class Hermione had a silvery-looking match and
the entire rest of the class, Muggleborn or otherwise, had exactly what
they’d started with.
Professor McGonagall awarded her another point for Ravenclaw.

**
*
After Transﬁguration class was dismissed, Hermione came over to
Harry’s desk as Harry was putting his books away into his pouch.
“You know,” Hermione said with an innocent expression on her face,
“I earned two points for Ravenclaw today.”
“So you did,” Harry said shortly.
“But that wasn’t as good as your seven points,” she said. “I guess I’m
just not as intelligent as you.”
Harry ﬁnished feeding his homework into the pouch and turned to
Hermione with his eyes narrowed. He’d actually forgotten about that.
She batted her eyelashes at him. “We have classes every day, though.
I wonder how long it will take you to ﬁnd some more Huﬄepuﬀs to
rescue? Today is Monday. So that gives you until Thursday.”
The two of them stared into each other’s eyes, unblinking.
Harry spoke ﬁrst. “Of course you realize this means war.”
“I didn’t know we’d been at peace.”
All of the other students were now watching with fascinated eyes.
All of the other students, plus, unfortunately, Professor McGonagall.
“Oh, Mr. Potter,” sang Professor McGonagall from the other side
of the room, “I have some good news for you. Madam Pomfrey has
approved your suggestion for preventing breakage in her Spimster wickets, and the plan is to ﬁnish the job by the end of next week. I’d say that
deserves... let’s call it ten points for Ravenclaw.”
Hermione’s face was gaping in betrayal and shock. Harry imagined
his own face didn’t look much diﬀerent.
*

215

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

*
*

*

“Professor...” Harry hissed.
“Those ten points are unquestionably deserved, Mr. Potter. I would
not hand out House points on a whim. To you it might have been a
simple matter of seeing something fragile and suggesting a way to protect it, but Spimster wickets are expensive, and the Headmaster was not
pleased the last time one broke.” McGonagall looked thoughtful. “My,
I wonder if any other student has ever earned seventeen House points
on his ﬁrst day of classes. I’ll have to look it up, but I suspect that’s a
new record. Perhaps we should have an announcement at dinnertime?”
“Professor!” Harry shrieked. “This is our war! Stop meddling!”
“Now you have until Thursday of next week, Mr. Potter. Unless,
of course, you engage in some sort of mischief and lose House points
before then. Addressing a professor disrespectfully, for example.” Professor McGonagall put a ﬁnger on her cheek and looked reﬂective. “I
expect you’ll hit negative numbers before the end of Friday.”
Harry’s mouth snapped shut. He sent his best Death Glare at McGonagall but she only seemed to ﬁnd it amusing.
“Yes, deﬁnitely an announcement at dinner,” Professor McGonagall
mused. “But it wouldn’t do to oﬀend the Slytherins, so the announcement should be brief. Just the number of points and the fact of the
record... and if anyone comes to you for help with their schoolwork and
is disappointed that you haven’t even started reading your textbooks,
you can always refer them to Miss Granger.”
“Professor!” said Hermione in a rather high-pitched voice.
Professor McGonagall ignored her. “My, I wonder how long it will
take before Miss Granger does something which deserves a dinnertime
announcement? I look forward to seeing it, whatever it may be.”
Harry and Hermione, by unspoken mutual consent, turned and
stormed out of the classroom. They were followed by a trail of hypnotized Ravenclaws.
“Um,” Harry said. “Are we still on for after dinner?”
“Of course,” said Hermione. “I wouldn’t want you to fall further
behind on your studying.”
“Why, thank you. And let me say that as brilliant as you are already,
I can’t help but wonder what you’ll be like once you have some elemen*

216

*

**
*

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS

*
*

*

tary training in rationality.”
“Is it really that useful? It didn’t seem to help you with Charms or
Transﬁguration.”
There was a slight pause.
“Well, I only got my schoolbooks four days ago. That’s why I had
to earn those seventeen House points without using my wand.”
“Four days ago? Maybe you can’t read eight books in four days but
you might have at least read one. How many days will it take to ﬁnish
at that rate? You know a lot of math, so can you tell me what’s eight,
times four, divided by zero?”
“I’ve got classes now, which you didn’t, but weekends are free, so...
lim epsilon approaching zero plus of eight times four divided by epsilon... 10:47am on Sunday.”
“I did it in three days actually.”
“2:47pm on Saturday it is, then. I’m sure I’ll ﬁnd the time somewhere.”
And there was evening and there was morning, the ﬁrst day.

*

217

*

CHAPTER

SIXTEEN

LATERAL THINKING
I’m not a psychopath, I’m just very creative.

**
*
s soon as he walked into the Defense classroom on Wednesday,
Harry knew that this class was going to be diﬀerent.
It was, for a start, the largest classroom he had yet seen at Hogwarts,
akin to a major university classroom, with layered tiers of desks facing
a gigantic ﬂat stage that seemed to be made out of white marble. The
classroom was high up in the castle—on the ﬁfth ﬂoor—and Harry knew
that was as much explanation as he’d get for where a room like this was
supposed to ﬁt. It was becoming clear that Hogwarts simply did not have
a geometry, Euclidean or otherwise; it had connections, not directions.
Unlike a university hall, there weren’t rows of folding seats with
built-in desks; instead there were quite ordinary Hogwarts wooden desks
and wooden chairs, lined up in a curve across each level of the classroom.
Except that each desk had a ﬂat, white, rectangular object propped up
on it. Harry hadn’t seen those things on desks before.
In the center of the gigantic platform, on a small raised dais of darker
marble, was a lone teacher’s desk. At which Quirrell sat slumped over
in his chair, head lolled back, drooling slightly over his robes.
Now what does that remind me of...?

A

*

219

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

Harry had arrived at the class so early that no other students were
there yet. (The English language was defective when it came to describing time travel; in particular, English lacked any words capable of
expressing how convenient it was.) Quirrell didn’t seem to be... functional... at the moment, and he didn’t particularly feel like approaching
Quirrell anyway.
Harry selected a desk, climbed up to it, sat down, and retrieved the
Defense textbook. He was around seven-eighths of the way through—
he’d planned on ﬁnishing the book before this class, actually, but he was
running behind schedule and had already used the Time-Turner twice
today.
After a short time there were sounds as the classroom began to ﬁll
up. Harry ignored them.
“Potter? What are you doing in this class?”
That voice didn’t belong here. Harry looked up. “Draco? What are
you doing in oh my god you have minions.”
One of the boys standing behind Draco seemed to have rather a lot of
muscle for an eleven-year-old, and the other was poised in a suspiciously
balanced-looking stance.
Draco smiled rather smugly and gestured behind him. “Potter, I introduce to you Mr. Crabbe,” his hand moved from Muscles to Balance,
“Mr. Goyle. Vincent, Gregory, this is Harry Potter.”
Mr. Goyle tilted his head and gave Harry a look that was probably supposed to mean something but ended up just looking squinty.
Mr. Crabbe said “Please to meetcha” in a tone that sounded like he was
trying to lower his voice as far as it could go.
A ﬂeeting expression of consternation crossed Draco’s face, but was
quickly replaced by a superior grin.
“You have minions!” Harry repeated. “Where do I get minions?”
Draco’s superior grin widened. “I’m afraid, Potter, that step one is
to be Sorted into Slytherin—”
“What? That’s not fair!”
“—and step two is for your families to have made an arrangement
shortly after you were born.”
Harry looked at Mr. Crabbe and Mr. Goyle. They both seemed to be
*

220 *

**
*

LATERAL THINKING

*
*

*

trying very hard to loom. That is, they were leaning forward, hunching
over their shoulders, sticking their necks out and staring at him.
“Um... hold on,” said Harry. “This was arranged years ago?”
“Exactly, Potter. I’m afraid you’re out of luck.”
Mr. Goyle produced a toothpick and began cleaning his teeth, still
looming.
“And,” said Harry, “Lucius insisted that you were not to grow up
knowing your bodyguards, and that you were only to meet them on
your ﬁrst day of school.”
That wiped the grin from Draco’s face. “Yes, Potter, we all know
you’re brilliant, the whole school knows by now, you can stop showing
oﬀ—”
“So they’ve been told their whole lives that they’re going to be your
minions and they’ve spent years imagining what minions are supposed
to be like—”
Draco winced.
“—and what’s worse, they do know each other and they’ve been practicing—”
“The boss told ya to shut it,” rumbled Mr. Crabbe. Mr. Goyle bit
down on his toothpick, holding it between his teeth, and used one hand
to crack the knuckles on the other.
“I told you not to do this in front of Harry Potter!”
The two looked a bit sheepish and Mr. Goyle quickly put the toothpick back in a pocket of his robes.
But the moment Draco turned away from them to face Harry again,
they went back to looming.
“I apologize,” Draco said stiﬄy, “for the insult which these imbeciles
have oﬀered you.”
Harry gave a meaningful look to Mr. Crabbe and Mr. Goyle. “I’d say
you’re being a little harsh on them, Draco. I think they’re acting exactly
the way I’d want my minions to act. I mean, if I had any minions.”
Draco’s jaw dropped.
“Hey, Gregory, you don’ think he’s tryna lure us away from the boss,
do ya?”
“I’m sure Mr. Potter wouldn’t be that foolish.”
*

221

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

“Oh, I wouldn’t dream of it,” Harry said smoothly. “It’s just something to keep in mind if your current employer seems unappreciative.
Besides, it never hurts to have other oﬀers while you’re negotiating your
working conditions, right?”
“What’s he doin’ in Ravenclaw?”
“I can’t imagine, Mr. Crabbe.”
“Both of you shut up,” Draco said through gritted teeth. “That’s an
order.” With a visible eﬀort, he transferred his attention to Harry again.
“Anyway, what’re you doing in the Slytherin Defense class?”
Harry frowned. “Hold on.” His hand went into his pouch. “Class
schedule.” He looked over the parchment. “Defense class, 2:30, and right
now it’s...” Harry looked at his mechanical watch, which read 11:23.
“2:23, unless I’ve lost track of time. Did I?” If he had, well, Harry knew
how to get to whatever class he was supposed to be in. God he loved
his Time-Turner and someday, when he was old enough, they would get
married.
“No, that sounds right,” Draco said, frowning. His gaze turned
to look over the rest of the auditorium, which was ﬁlling with greentrimmed robes and...
“Gryﬃndorks!” spat Draco. “What’re they doing here?”
“Hm,” Harry said. “Professor Quirrell did say... I forget his exact
words... that he would be ignoring some of the Hogwarts teaching conventions. Maybe he just combined all his classes.”
“Huh,” said Draco. “You’re the ﬁrst Ravenclaw in here.”
“Yup. Got here early.”
“What’re you doing all the way in the back row, then?”
Harry blinked. “I dunno, seemed like a good place to sit?”
Draco snorted. “You couldn’t get any further away from the teacher
if you tried.” Draco leaned forward slightly, looking suddenly intent.
“Anyway, Potter, is it true about what you said to Derrick and his crew?”
“Who’s Derrick?”
“You hit him with a pie?”
“Two pies, actually. What am I supposed to have said to him?”
“That what he was doing wasn’t the slightest bit cunning or ambitious and he was a disgrace to the legacy of Salazar Slytherin.” Draco was
*

222 *

**
*

LATERAL THINKING

*
*

*

staring hard at Harry.
“That... sounds about right,” Harry said. “I think it was more like,
‘is this some kind of incredibly clever plot that will gain you a future
advantage or is it really as much of a disgrace to the memory of Salazar
Slytherin as it looks like’ or something like that. I don’t remember the
exact words.”
Draco shook his head. “You’re sending us mixed messages here, Potter.”
“Huh?” Harry said in honest confusion.
“Warrington said that spending a long time under the Sorting Hat is
one of the warning signs of a major Dark Wizard. Everyone was talking
about it, wondering if they should start sucking up to you just in case.
Then you went and protected a bunch of Huﬄepuﬀs, for Merlin’s sake.
Then you told Derrick he’s a disgrace to Salazar Slytherin’s memory!
What’s anyone supposed to think?”
“That the Sorting Hat decided to put me in the House of ‘Slytherin!
Just kidding! Ravenclaw!’ and I’ve been acting accordingly.”
Mr. Crabbe and Mr. Goyle both giggled, causing Mr. Goyle to
quickly clap a hand to his mouth.
“We’d better go get our seats,” Draco said. He hesitated, seemed to
become more formal. “Potter, without making any commitments as yet,
I do wish to continue our previous conversation and your condition is
acceptable to me.”
Harry nodded. “Would you mind terribly if I waited until Saturday
afternoon? I’m in a bit of a contest right now.”
“A contest?”
“See if I can read all my textbooks as fast as Hermione Granger did.”
“Granger,” Draco echoed. His eyes narrowed. “The mudblood who
thinks she’s Merlin? If you’re trying to show her up then all Slytherin
wishes you the very best of luck, Potter, and I won’t bother you ‘til
Saturday.” Draco inclined his head in a gesture of measured respect, and
wandered oﬀ, tailed by his minions.
Oh, this is going to be so much fun to juggle, I can already tell.
The classroom was ﬁlling up rapidly now with all four colors of trim:
green, red, yellow, and blue. Draco and his two friends seemed to be in
*

223 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

the midst of trying to acquire three contiguous front-row seats—already
occupied, of course. Mr. Crabbe and Mr. Goyle were looming vigorously, but it didn’t seem to be having much eﬀect.
Harry bent over his Defense textbook and continued reading.

**
*
At 2:35pm, when most of the seats were taken and no one else seemed
to be coming in, Professor Quirrell gave a sudden jerk in his chair and
sat up straight, and his face appeared on all the ﬂat, white rectangular
objects that were propped up on the students’ desks.
Harry was taken by surprise, both by the sudden appearance of Professor Quirrell’s face and by the resemblance to Muggle television. There
was something both nostalgic and sad about that, it seemed so much like
a piece of home and yet it wasn’t really...
“Good afternoon, my young apprentices,” said Professor Quirrell.
His voice seemed to come from the desk screen and to be speaking directly to Harry. “Welcome to your ﬁrst class in Battle Magic, as the
founders of Hogwarts would have put it; or, as it happens to be called
in the late twentieth century, Defense Against the Dark Arts.”
There was a certain amount of frantic scrabbling as students, taken
by surprise, reached for their parchment or notebooks.
“No,” Professor Quirrell said, “really, don’t bother writing down
what this class used to be called. No pointless question like that will
ever appear on one of my tests. That is a promise.”
Many students sat straight up at that, looking rather shocked.
Professor Quirrell was smiling thinly. “Those of you who have
wasted your time by reading ahead in your useless ﬁrst-year Defense textbooks—”
Someone made a choking sound. Harry wondered if it was Hermione.
“—may have gotten the impression that although this class is called
Defense Against the Dark Arts, it is actually about how to defend against
Nightmare Butterﬂies, which cause mildly bad dreams, or Acid Slugs,
*

224 *

**
*

LATERAL THINKING

*
*

*

which can dissolve all the way through a two-inch wooden beam given
most of a day.”
Professor Quirrell stood up, shoving his chair back from the desk.
The screen on Harry’s desk followed his every move. Professor Quirrell
strode toward the front of the classroom, and bellowed:
“The Hungarian Horntail is taller than a dozen men! It breathes ﬁre
so quickly and so accurately that it can melt a Snitch in midﬂight! One
Killing Curse will bring it down!”
There were gasps from the students.
“The Mountain Troll is more dangerous than the Hungarian Horntail! It is slow, but strong enough to bite through steel! Its skin is tough
enough to deﬂect Cutting Charms! Its sense of smell is so acute that it
can tell from afar whether its prey is part of a pack, or alone and vulnerable! Most fearsome of all, the troll is unique among magical creatures
in continuously maintaining a form of Transﬁguration on itself—it is
always transforming into its own body. If you somehow succeed in ripping oﬀ its arm it will grow another one within seconds! Fire and acid
will produce scar tissue which can temporarily confuse a troll’s regenerative powers—for an hour or two! They are smart enough to use clubs
as tools! The mountain troll is the third most perfect killing machine in
all Nature! One Killing Curse will bring it down.”
The students were looking rather shocked.
Professor Quirrell was smiling rather grimly. “Your useless excuse
for a third-year defense textbook will suggest to you that you expose
the mountain troll to sunlight, which will freeze it in place. This, my
young apprentices, is the sort of useless knowledge that you will never
ﬁnd on one of my exams. You do not encounter mountain trolls in open
daylight! The idea that you should use sunlight to stop them is the result
of foolish textbook authors trying to show oﬀ their mastery of minutia
at the expense of practicality. Just because there is a ridiculously obscure
way of dealing with mountain trolls does not mean you should actually
try to use it! The Killing Curse is unblockable, unstoppable, and works
every single time on anything with a brain. If, as an adult wizard, you
ﬁnd yourself incapable of using the Killing Curse, then you can simply
Apparate away! Likewise if you are facing the second most perfect killing
*

225 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

machine, a Dementor. You just Apparate away!”
“Unless, of course,” Professor Quirrell said, his voice now lower and
harder, “you are under the inﬂuence of an anti-Apparition jinx. No,
there is exactly one monster which can threaten you once you are fully
grown. The single most dangerous monster in all the world, so dangerous that nothing else comes close. The adult wizard. That is the only
thing that will still be able to threaten you.”
Professor Quirrell’s lips were set in a thin line. “I will reluctantly
teach you enough trivia for a passing grade on the Ministry-mandated
portions of your ﬁrst-year ﬁnals. Since your exact grade on these sections will make no diﬀerence to your future life, anyone who wants
more than a passing grade is welcome to waste their own time studying
our pathetic excuse for a textbook. The title of this class is not Defense
Against Minor Pests. You are here to learn how to defend yourselves
against the Dark Arts. Which means, let us be very clear on this, defending yourselves against Dark Wizards. People with wands who want
to hurt you and who will likely succeed in doing so unless you hurt
them ﬁrst! There is no defense without oﬀense! There is no defense
without ﬁghting! This reality is deemed too harsh for eleven-year-olds
by the fat, overpaid, Auror-guarded politicians who mandated your curriculum. To the abyss with those fools! You are here for the class that
has been taught at Hogwarts for eight hundred years! Welcome to your
ﬁrst year of Battle Magic!”
Harry started applauding. He couldn’t help himself, it was too inspiring.
Once Harry started clapping there was some scattered response from
Gryﬃndor, and more from Slytherin, but most students simply seemed
too stunned to react.
Professor Quirrell made a cutting gesture, and the applause died instantly. “Thank you very much,” said Professor Quirrell. “Now to practicalities. I have combined all my ﬁrst-year Battle classes into one, which
allows me to oﬀer you twice as much class time as Doubles sessions—”
There were gasps of horror.
“—an increased load which I will make up to you by not assigning
any homework.”
*

226 *

**
*

LATERAL THINKING

*
*

*

The gasps of horror cut oﬀ abruptly.
“Yes, you heard me correctly. I will teach you to ﬁght, not to write
twelve inches on ﬁghting due Monday.”
Harry desperately wished he had thought to sit next to Hermione so
that he could see the look on her face right now, but on the other hand
he was pretty sure he was imagining it accurately.
Also Harry was in love. It would be a three-way wedding: him, the
Time-Turner, and Professor Quirrell.
“For those of you who want to spend more time on Battle Magic, I
have arranged some after-school activities that I think you will ﬁnd quite
interesting as well as educational. Do you want to show the world your
own abilities instead of watching fourteen other people play Quidditch?
More than seven people can ﬁght in an army.”
Hot damn.
“These and other after-school activities will also earn you Quirrell
points. What are Quirrell points, you ask? The House point system
does not suit my needs, because it makes House points too rare. I like
to let my students know how they are doing more frequently than that.
And on the rare occasions I oﬀer you a written test, it will grade itself
as you go along, and if you get too many related questions wrong, your
test will show the names of students who got those questions right, and
those students will be able to earn Quirrell points by helping you.”
...wow. Why didn’t the other professors use a system like that?
“What good are Quirrell points, you wonder? For a start, ten Quirrell points will be worth one House point. But they will earn you other
favors as well. Would you like to take your exam at an unusual time?
Is there a particular session you would very much prefer to skip? You
will ﬁnd that I can be very ﬂexible on behalf of students who have accumulated enough Quirrell points. Quirrell points will control the generalship of the armies. And for Christmas—just before the Christmas
break—I will grant someone a wish. Any school-related feat that lies
within my power, my inﬂuence, or above all, my ingenuity. Yes, I was
in Slytherin and I am oﬀering to formulate a cunning plot on your behalf, if that is what it takes to accomplish your desire. This wish will go
to whoever has earned the most Quirrell points within all seven years.”
*

227 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

That would be Harry.
“Now leave your books and loose items at your desks—they will be
safe, the screens will watch over them for you—and come down onto this
platform. We’re about to play a game called Who’s the Most Dangerous
Student in the Classroom.”

**
*
Harry twisted his wand in his right hand and said “Ma-ha-su!”
There was another high-pitched “bing” from the ﬂoating blue sphere
that Professor Quirrell had assigned to Harry as his target. That particular sound meant a perfect strike, which Harry had been gotten on nine
out of his last ten attempts.
Somewhere Professor Quirrell had dug up a hex that was incredibly
easy to pronounce, and had a ridiculously simple wand motion, and had
a tendency to hit wherever you were currently looking at. Professor
Quirrell had disdainfully proclaimed that real battle magic was far more
diﬃcult than this. That the hex was entirely useless in actual combat.
That it was a barely ordered burst of magic whose only real content
was the aiming, and that it would produce, when it hit, a pain brieﬂy
equivalent to being punched hard in the nose. That the sole purpose of
this test was to see who was a fast learner, since Professor Quirrell was
certain no one would have previously encountered this hex or anything
like it.
Harry didn’t care about any of that.
“Ma-ha-su!”
A red bolt of energy shot out of his wand and struck the target and the
blue sphere once again made the bing which meant the spell had actually
worked for him.
Harry was feeling like a real wizard for the ﬁrst time since he’d come
to Hogwarts. He wished the target would dodge like the little spheres
that Ben Kenobi had used for training Luke, but for some reason Professor Quirrell had instead lined up all the students and targets in neat
orders which made sure they wouldn’t ﬁre on each other.
*

228 *

**
*

LATERAL THINKING

*
*

*

So Harry lowered his wand, skipped to the right, snapped up his
wand and twisted and shouted “Ma-ha-su!”
There was a lower-pitched “dong” which meant he’d gotten it almost
right.
Harry put his wand into his pocket, skipped back to the left and
drew and ﬁred another red bolt of energy.
The high-pitched bing which resulted was easily one of the most satisfying sounds he’d heard in his life. Harry wanted to scream in triumph
at the top of his lungs. I can do magic! Fear me, Laws of Physics, I’m
coming to violate you!
“Ma-ha-su!” Harry’s voice was coming out rather loud, but hardly
noticeable over the steady chant of similar cries from around the classroom/platform.
“Enough,” said Professor Quirrell’s ampliﬁed voice. (It didn’t sound
loud. It sounded like normal volume, coming from just behind your
left shoulder, no matter where you were standing relative to Professor
Quirrell.) “I see that everyone’s gotten it at least once now.” The targetspheres all turned red and began to drift up toward the ceiling.
Professor Quirrell was standing on the raised dais in the center of the
platform, leaning slightly on his teacher’s desk with one hand.
“I told you,” Professor Quirrell said, “that we would play a game
called Who’s the Most Dangerous Student in the Classroom. There is
one student in this classroom who mastered the Sumerian Simple Strike
Hex faster than anyone else—”
Oh blah blah blah.
“—and went on to help seven other students. For which she has
earned the ﬁrst seven Quirrell points awarded to your year. Hermione
Granger, please come forward. It’s time for the next stage of the game.”
Hermione Granger began striding forward, a mixed look of triumph
and apprehension on her face. The Ravenclaws looked on proudly, the
Slytherins with glares, and Harry with frank annoyance. Harry had
done ﬁne this time. He was probably even in the upper half of the class,
now that everyone had been faced with an equally unfamiliar spell and
Harry had read all the way through Adalbert Waﬄing’s Magical Theory.
And yet Hermione was still doing better.
*

229 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

Somewhere in the back of his mind was the fear that Hermione was
simply smarter than him.
But for now Harry was going to pin his hopes on the known facts
that (a) Hermione had read a lot more than the standard textbooks and
(b) Adalbert Waﬄing was an uninspired sod who’d written Magical Theory to pander to a school board that didn’t think much of eleven-yearolds.
Hermione reached the central dais and stepped up.
“Hermione Granger mastered a completely unfamiliar spell in two
minutes, almost a full minute faster than the next runner-up.” Professor
Quirrell turned slowly in place to look at all the students watching them.
“Could Miss Granger’s intelligence make her the most dangerous student
in the classroom? Well? What do you think?”
No one seemed to be thinking anything at the moment. Even Harry
wasn’t sure what to say.
“Let’s ﬁnd out, shall we?” said Professor Quirrell. He turned back
to Hermione, and gestured toward the wider class. “Select any student
you like and cast the Simple Strike Hex on them.”
Hermione froze where she stood.
“Come now,” Professor Quirrell said smoothly. “You have cast this
spell perfectly over ﬁfty times. It is not permanently harmful or even all
that painful. It hurts around as much as a hard punch and lasts only a few
seconds.” Professor Quirrell’s voice grew harder. “This is a direct order
from your professor, Miss Granger. Choose a target and ﬁre a Simple
Strike Hex.”
Hermione’s face was screwed up in horror and her wand was trembling in her hand. Harry’s own ﬁngers were clenching his own wand
hard in sympathy. Even though he could see what Professor Quirrell
was trying to do. Even though he could see the point Professor Quirrell
was trying to make.
“If you do not raise your wand and ﬁre, Miss Granger, you will lose
a Quirrell point.”
Harry stared at Hermione, willing her to look in his direction. His
right hand was softly tapping his own chest. Pick me, I’m not afraid...
Hermione’s wand twitched in her hand, and then her face relaxed,
*

230 *

**
*

LATERAL THINKING

*
*

*

and she lowered her wand to her side.
“No,” said Hermione Granger.
Her voice was calm, and even though it wasn’t loud, everyone heard
it in the silence.
“Then I must deduct one point from you,” said Professor Quirrell.
“This is a test, and you have failed it.”
That reached her. Harry could see it. But she kept her shoulders
straight.
Professor Quirrell’s voice was sympathetic and seemed to ﬁll the
whole room. “Knowing things isn’t always enough, Miss Granger. If
you cannot give and receive violence on the order of stubbing your toe,
then you cannot defend yourself and you will not pass my Defense class.
Please rejoin your classmates.”
Hermione walked back toward the Ravenclaw cluster. Her face
looked peaceful and Harry, for some odd reason, wanted to start clapping. Even though Professor Quirrell had been right.
“So,” Professor Quirrell said. “It becomes clear that Hermione Granger is not the most dangerous student in the classroom. Who do you
think might actually be the most dangerous person here?—besides me,
of course.”
Without even thinking about it, Harry’s eyes turned toward the
Slytherin contingent.
“Draco, of the Noble and Most Ancient House of Malfoy,” said Professor Quirrell. “It seems that rather a lot of people are looking in your
direction. Please come forward.”
Draco did so, walking with a certain pride in his bearing. He stepped
onto the dais and looked up at Professor Quirrell with a smile.
“Mr. Malfoy,” Professor Quirrell said. “Fire.”
Harry would have tried to stop it if there’d been time but in one
smooth motion Draco spun on the Ravenclaw contingent and raised his
wand and said “Mahasu!” like it was all one syllable and Hermione was
saying “Ow!” and that was that.
“Well struck,” said Professor Quirrell. “Two Quirrell points to you.
But tell me, why did you target Miss Granger?”
There was a pause.
*

231

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

Finally Draco said, “Because she stood out the most.”
Professor Quirrell’s lips turned up in a thin smile. “And that is the
true reason why Draco Malfoy is dangerous. If he had selected anyone else, that person would be more likely to resent being singled out,
and Mr. Malfoy would be more likely to make an enemy. And while
Mr. Malfoy might have given some other justiﬁcation for selecting her,
that would have served him no purpose but to alienate some of you,
while others are already cheering him whether he says anything or not.
In short, Mr. Malfoy is dangerous because he knows who to strike and
who not to strike, how to make allies and avoid making enemies. Two
more Quirrell points to you, Mr. Malfoy. And as you have demonstrated
an exemplary virtue of Slytherin, I think that Salazar’s House has earned
a point as well. You may rejoin your friends.”
Draco bowed slightly and walked back to the Slytherin contingent.
Some clapping started from the green-trimmed robes, but Professor
Quirrell made a cutting gesture and silence fell again.
“It might seem that our game is done,” said Professor Quirrell. “And
yet there is a single student in this classroom who is more dangerous
than the scion of Malfoy.”
And now for some reason there seemed to be an awful lot of people
looking at...
“Harry Potter. Please come forward.”
This did not bode well.
Harry reluctantly walked toward where Professor Quirrell stood on
his raised dais, still leaning slightly against his desk.
The nervousness of being put into the spotlight seemed to be sharpening Harry’s wits as he approached the dais, and his mind was rufﬂing through possibilities for what Professor Quirrell might think could
demonstrate Harry’s dangerousness. Would he be asked to cast a spell?
To defeat a Dark Lord?
Demonstrate his supposed immunity to the Killing Curse? Surely
Professor Quirrell was too smart for that...
Harry stopped well short of the dais, and Professor Quirrell didn’t
ask him to come any closer.
“The irony is,” said Professor Quirrell, “you all looked at the right
*

232 *

**
*

LATERAL THINKING

*
*

*

person for entirely the wrong reasons. You are thinking,” Professor
Quirrell’s lips twisted, “that Harry Potter has defeated the Dark Lord,
and so must be very dangerous. Bah. He was one year old. Whatever
quirk of fate killed the Dark Lord likely had little to do with Mr. Potter’s abilities as a ﬁghter. But after I heard rumors of one Ravenclaw
facing down ﬁve older Slytherins, I interviewed several eyewitnesses and
came to the conclusion that Harry Potter would be my most dangerous
student.”
A jolt of adrenaline poured into Harry’s system. He didn’t know
what conclusion Professor Quirrell had come to, but that couldn’t be
good.
“Ah, Professor Quirrell—” Harry started to say.
Professor Quirrell looked amused. “You’re thinking that I’ve come
up with a wrong answer, aren’t you, Mr. Potter? You will learn to expect
better of me.” Professor Quirrell straightened from where he had leaned
on the desk. “Mr. Potter, all things have their accustomed uses. Give me
ten unaccustomed uses of objects in this room for combat!”
For a moment Harry was rendered speechless by the sheer, raw shock
of having been understood.
And then the ideas started to pour out.
“There are desks which are heavy enough to be fatal if dropped from a
great height. There are chairs with metal legs that could impale someone
if driven hard enough. The air in this classroom would be deadly by its
absence, since people die in vacuum, and it can serve as a carrier for
poison gases.”
Harry had to stop brieﬂy for breath, and into that pause Professor
Quirrell said:
“That’s three. You need ten. The rest of the class thinks that you’ve
already used up the whole contents of the classroom.”
“Ha! The ﬂoor can be removed to create a spike pit to fall into, the
ceiling can be collapsed on someone, the walls can serve as raw material
for Transﬁguration into any number of deadly things—knives, say.”
“That’s six. But surely you’re scraping the bottom of the barrel
now?”
“I haven’t even started! Just look at all the people! Having a Gryf*

233 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

ﬁndor attack the enemy is an ordinary use, of course—”
“I wouldn’t have let you count that one.”
“—but their blood can also be used to drown someone. Ravenclaws
are known for their brains, but their internal organs could be sold on
the black market for enough money to hire an assassin. Slytherins aren’t
just useful as assassins, they can also be thrown at suﬃcient velocity to
crush an enemy. And Huﬄepuﬀs, in addition to being hard workers,
also contain bones that can be removed, sharpened, and used to stab
someone.”
By now the rest of the class was staring at Harry in some horror.
Even the Slytherins looked shocked.
“That’s ten, though I’m being generous in counting the Ravenclaw
one. Now, for extra credit, one point for each use of objects in this
room which you have not already named.” Professor Quirrell favored
Harry with a companionable smile. “The rest of the class thinks you’re
in trouble now, since you’ve named everything except the targets and
you have no idea what can be done with those.”
“Bah! I’ve named all the people, but not my robes, which can be
used to suﬀocate an enemy if wrapped around their head enough times,
or Hermione Granger’s robes, which can be torn into strips and tied
into a rope and used to hang someone, or Draco Malfoy’s robes, which
can be used to start a ﬁre—”
“Three points,” said Professor Quirrell, “no more clothing now.”
“My wand can be pushed into an enemy’s brain through their eye
socket” and someone made a horriﬁed, strangling sound.
“Four points, no more wands.”
“My wristwatch could suﬀocate someone if jammed down their
throat—”
“Five points, and enough.”
“Hmph,” Harry said. “Ten Quirrell points to one House point,
right? You should have let me just keep going until I won the House
Cup, I haven’t even started on the unaccustomed uses of everything I’ve
got in my pockets” or the mokeskin pouch itself and he couldn’t talk
about the Time-Turner or the invisibility cloak but there had to be something he could say about those red spheres...
*

234 *

**
*

LATERAL THINKING

*
*

*

“Enough, Mr. Potter. Well, do you all think you understand what
makes Mr. Potter the most dangerous student in the classroom?”
There was a low murmur of assent.
“Say it out loud, please. Terry Boot, what makes your dorm-mate
dangerous?”
“Ah... um... he’s creative?”
“Wrong!” bellowed Professor Quirrell, and his ﬁst came down
sharply on his desk with an ampliﬁed sound that made everyone jump.
“All of Mr. Potter’s ideas were worse than useless!”
Harry started in surprise.
“Remove the ﬂoor to create a spike trap? Ridiculous! In combat you
do not have that sort of preparation time and if you did there would be
a hundred better uses! Transﬁgure material from the walls? Mr. Potter
cannot perform Transﬁguration! Mr. Potter had exactly one idea which
he could use immediately, right now, without extensive preparation or a
cooperative enemy or magic he does not know. That idea was to jam his
wand through his enemy’s eye socket. Which would be far more likely
to break his wand than to kill his opponent! In short, Mr. Potter, I’m
afraid that your suggestions were uniformly awful.”
“What?” Harry said indignantly. “You asked for unusual ideas, not
practical ones! I was thinking outside the box! How would you use
something in this classroom to kill someone?”
Professor Quirrell’s expression was disapproving, but there were
smile crinkles around his eyes. “Mr. Potter, I never said you were to
kill. There is a time and a place for taking your enemy alive, and inside
a Hogwarts classroom is usually one of those places. But to answer your
question, hit them on the neck with the edge of a chair.”
There was some laughter from the Slytherins, but they were laughing
with Harry, not at him.
Everyone else was looking rather horriﬁed.
“But Mr. Potter has now demonstrated why he is the most dangerous
student in the classroom. I asked for unaccustomed uses of items in this
room for combat. Mr. Potter could have suggested using a desk to block
a curse, or using a chair to trip an oncoming enemy, or wrapping cloth
around his arm to create an improvised shield. Instead, every single use
*

235 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

that Mr. Potter named was oﬀensive rather than defensive, and either
fatal or potentially fatal.”
What? Wait, that couldn’t be true... Harry had a sudden sense of
vertigo as he tried to remember what exactly he’d suggested, surely there
had to be a counterexample...
“And that,” Professor Quirrell said, “is why Mr. Potter’s ideas were
so strange and useless—because he had to reach far into the impractical in
order to meet his standard of killing the enemy. To him, any idea which
fell short of that was not worth considering. This reﬂects a quality that
we might call intent to kill. I have it. Harry Potter has it, which is how
he could stare down ﬁve older Slytherins. Draco Malfoy does not have
it, not yet. Mr. Malfoy would hardly shrink from talk of ordinary murder, but even he was shocked—yes you were Mr. Malfoy, I was watching
your face—when Mr. Potter described how to use his classmates’ bodies
as raw material. There are censors inside your mind which make you
ﬂinch away from thoughts like that. Mr. Potter thinks purely of killing
the enemy, he will grasp at any means to do so, he does not ﬂinch, his
censors are oﬀ. Even though his youthful genius is so undisciplined and
impractical as to be useless, his intent to kill makes Harry Potter the Most
Dangerous Student in the Classroom. One ﬁnal point to him—no, let
us make that a point to Ravenclaw—for this indispensable requisite of a
true ﬁghting wizard.”
Harry’s mouth was gaping open in speechless shock as he searched
frantically for something to say to this. That is so completely not what I
am about!
But he could see that the other students were starting to believe it.
Harry’s mind was ﬂipping through possible denials and not ﬁnding anything that could stand up against the authoritative voice of Professor
Quirrell. The best Harry had come up with was “I’m not a psychopath,
I’m just very creative” and that sounded kind of ominous. He needed to
say something unexpected, something that would make people stop and
reconsider—
“And now,” Professor Quirrell said. “Mr. Potter. Fire.”
Nothing happened, of course.
“Still in denial, I see,” said Professor Quirrell. He sighed. “Ah, well.
*

236 *

**
*

LATERAL THINKING

*
*

*

I suppose we all have to start somewhere. Mr. Potter, select any student
you please for a Simple Strike Hex. You will do so before I dismiss class
for the day. If you do not, I will begin deducting House points, and I
will keep on deducting them until you do.”
Harry carefully raised his wand. He had to do that much, or Professor Quirrell might start deducting House points right away.
Slowly, as though on a roasting platter, Harry turned to face the
Slytherins.
And Harry’s eyes met Draco’s.
Draco didn’t look the slightest bit afraid. He wasn’t giving any visible
sign of assent such as Harry had given Hermione, but then he could
hardly be expected to do so. The other Slytherins would think that
rather odd.
“Why the hesitation?” said Professor Quirrell. “Surely there’s only
one obvious choice.”
“Yes,” Harry said. “Only one obvious choice.”
Harry twisted the wand and said “Ma-ha-su!”
There was complete silence in the classroom.
Harry shook his left arm, trying to get rid of the lingering sting.
There was more silence.
Finally Professor Quirrell sighed. “Yes, yes, very ingenious, but
there was a lesson to be taught and you dodged it. One point from
Ravenclaw for showing oﬀ your own cleverness at the expense of the
actual goal. Class dismissed.”
And before anyone else could say anything, Harry sang out:
“Just kidding! Ravenclaw!”
There was silence for a brief moment after that, a sound of people
thinking, and then the murmurs started and rapidly rose to a roar of
conversation.
Harry turned toward Professor Quirrell, the two of them needed to
talk—
Quirrell had slumped over and was trudging back to his chair.
No. Not acceptable. They really needed to talk. Screw the zombie
act, Professor Quirrell would probably wake up if Harry poked him a
couple of times. Harry started forward—
*

237 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

*
*

*

Wrong
Don’t
Bad idea
Harry swayed and stopped in his tracks, feeling dizzy.
And then a ﬂock of Ravenclaws descended on him and the discussions
began.

*

238 *

CHAPTER

SE V ENTEEN

LOCATING THE
H YPOTHESIS
“You start to see the pattern, hear the rhythm of the world.”

**
*
hursday.
If you wanted to be speciﬁc, 7:24am on Thursday morning.
Harry was sitting on his bed, a textbook lying limp in his motionless
hands.
Harry had just had an idea for a truly brilliant experimental test.
It would mean waiting an extra hour for breakfast, but that was why
he had meal bars. No, this idea absolutely positively had to be tested
right away, immediately, now.
Harry set the textbook aside, leaped out of bed, raced around his bed,
yanked out the cavern level of his trunk, ran down the stairs, and started
moving boxes of books around. (He really needed to unpack and get
bookcases at some point but he was in the middle of his textbook reading
contest with Hermione and falling behind so he hadn’t had time.)
Harry found the book he wanted and raced back upstairs.
The other boys were getting ready to go down to breakfast in the
Great Hall and start the day.

T

*

239 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

“Excuse me can you do something for me?” said Harry. He was ﬂipping through the book’s index as he spoke, found the page with the ﬁrst
ten thousand primes, ﬂipped to that page, and thrust the book at Anthony Goldstein. “Pick two three-digit numbers from this list. Don’t
tell me what they are. Just multiply them together and tell me the product. Oh, and can you do the calculation twice to double-check? Please
make really sure you’ve got the right answer, I’m not sure what’s going
to happen to me or the universe if you make a multiplication error.”
It said a lot about what life in that dorm had been like over the past
few days that Anthony didn’t even bother saying anything like “Why’d
you suddenly ﬂip out?” or “That seems really weird, what are your reasons for asking?” or “What do you mean, you’re not sure what’s going
to happen to the universe?”
Anthony wordlessly accepted the book and took out a parchment
and quill. Harry spun around and shut his eyes, making sure not to
see anything, dancing back and forth and bouncing up and down with
impatience. He got a pad of paper and a mechanical pencil and got ready
to write.
“Okay,” Anthony said, “One hundred eighty-one thousand, four
hundred twenty-nine.”
Harry wrote down 181,429. He repeated what he’d just written
down, and Anthony conﬁrmed it.
Then Harry raced back down into the cavern level of his trunk,
glanced at his watch (the watch said 4:28 which meant 7:28) and then
shut his eyes.
Around thirty seconds later, Harry heard the sound of steps, followed by the sound of the cavern level of the trunk sliding shut. (Harry
wasn’t worried about suﬀocating. An automatic Air-Freshening Charm
was part of what you got if you were willing to buy a really good trunk.
Wasn’t magic wonderful, it didn’t have to worry about electric bills.)
And when Harry opened his eyes, he saw just what he’d been hoping
to see, a folded piece of paper left on the ﬂoor, the gift of his future self.
Call that piece of paper “Paper-”.
Harry tore a piece of paper oﬀ his pad.
Call that “Paper-”. It was, of course, the same piece of paper. You
*

240 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

could even see, if you looked closely, that the ragged edges matched.
Harry reviewed in his mind the algorithm that he would follow.
If Harry opened up Paper-and it was blank, then he would write
“101 × 101” down on Paper-, fold it up, study for an hour, go back in
time, drop oﬀ Paper-(which would thereby become Paper-), and head on
up out of the cavern level to join his dorm mates for breakfast.
If Harry opened up Paper-and it had two numbers written on it,
Harry would multiply those numbers together.
If their product equaled 181,429, Harry would write down those
two numbers on Paper-and send Paper-back in time.
Otherwise Harry would add 2 to the number on the right and write
down the new pair of numbers on Paper-. Unless that made the number
on the right greater than 997, in which case Harry would add 2 to the
number on the left and write down 101 on the right.
And if Paper-said 997×997, Harry would leave Paper-blank.
Which meant that the only possible stable time loop was the one in
which Paper-contained the two prime factors of 181,429.
If this worked, Harry could use it to recover any sort of answer that
was easy to check but hard to ﬁnd. He wouldn’t have just shown that
P = NP once you had a Time-Turner, this trick was more general than
that. Harry could use it to ﬁnd the combinations on combination locks,
or passwords of every sort. Maybe even ﬁnd the entrance to Slytherin’s
Chamber of Secrets, if Harry could ﬁgure out some systematic way of
describing all the locations in Hogwarts. It would be an awesome cheat
even by Harry’s standards of cheating.
Harry took Paper-in his trembling hand, and unfolded it.
Paper-said in slightly shaky handwriting:
Do not mess with time
Harry wrote down “Do not mess with time” on Paper-in slightly
shaky handwriting, folded it neatly, and resolved not to do any more
truly brilliant experiments on Time until he was at least ﬁfteen years
old.
To the best of Harry’s knowledge, that had been the scariest experimental result in the entire history of science.
It had been somewhat diﬃcult for Harry to focus on reading his text*

241

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

book for the next hour.
That was how Harry’s Thursday started.

**
*
Thursday.
If you wanted to be speciﬁc, 3:32pm on Thursday afternoon.
Harry and all the other boys in the ﬁrst year were outside on a grassy
ﬁeld with Madam Hooch, standing next to the Hogwarts supply of
broomsticks. The girls would be learning to ﬂy separately. Apparently,
for some reason, girls didn’t want to learn how to ﬂy on broomsticks in
the presence of boys.
Harry had been a little wobbly all day long. He just couldn’t seem to
stop wondering how that particular stable time loop had been selected
out of what was, in retrospect, a rather large space of possibilities.
Also: seriously, broomsticks? He was going to ﬂy on, basically, a line
segment? Wasn’t that pretty much the single most unstable shape you
could possibly ﬁnd, short of attempting to hold on to a point marble?
Who’d selected that design for a ﬂying device, out of all the possibilities?
Harry had been hoping that it was just a ﬁgure of speech, but no, they
were standing in front of what looked for all the world like ordinary
wooden kitchen broomsticks. Had someone just gotten stuck on the
idea of broomsticks and failed to consider anything else? It had to be.
There was no way that the optimal designs for cleaning kitchens and
ﬂying would happen to coincide if you worked them out from scratch.
It was a clear day with a bright blue sky and a brilliant sun that was
just begging to get in your eyes and make it impossible to see, if you
were trying to ﬂy around the sky. The ground was nice and dry, smelling
positively baked, and somehow felt very, very hard under Harry’s shoes.
Harry kept reminding himself that the lowest common denominator
of eleven-year-olds was expected to learn this and it couldn’t be that hard.
“Stick out your right hand over the broom, or left hand if you’re lefthanded,” called Madam Hooch. “And say, up!”
“Up!” everyone shouted.
*

242 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

The broomstick leapt eagerly into Harry’s hand.
Which put him at the head of the class, for once. Apparently saying
“up!” was a lot more diﬃcult than it looked, and most of the broomsticks
were rolling around on the ground or trying to inch away from their
would-be riders.
(Of course Harry would have bet money that Hermione had done at
least as well when it came her own turn to try, earlier in the day. There
couldn’t possibly be anything he could master on the ﬁrst try which
would baﬄe Hermione, and if there was and it turned out to be broomstick riding instead of anything intellectual, Harry would just die.)
It took a while for everyone to get a broomstick in front of them.
Madam Hooch showed them how to mount and then walked around
the ﬁeld, correcting grips and stances. Apparently even among the few
children who’d been allowed to ﬂy at home, they hadn’t been taught to
do it correctly.
Madam Hooch surveyed the ﬁeld of boys, and nodded. “Now, when
I blow my whistle, you kick oﬀ from the ground, hard.”
Harry swallowed hard, trying to quell the queasy feeling in his stomach.
“Keep your brooms steady, rise a few feet, and then come straight
back down by leaning forward slightly. On my whistle—three—two—”
One of the brooms shot skyward, accompanied by a young boy’s
screams—of horror, not delight. The boy was spinning at an awful rate
as he ascended, they only got glimpses of his white face—
As though in slow motion, Harry was leaping back oﬀ his own
broomstick and scrabbling for his wand, though he didn’t really know
what he planned to do with it, he’d had exactly two sessions of Charms
and the last one had been the Hover Charm but Harry had only been
able to cast the spell successfully one time out of three and he certainly
couldn’t levitate whole people—
If there is any hidden power in me, let it reveal itself now!
“Come back, boy!” shouted Madam Hooch (which had to be the
most unhelpful instruction imaginable for dealing with an out-of-control
broomstick, from a ﬂying instructor, and a fully automatic section of
Harry’s brain added Madam Hooch to his tally of fools).
*

243 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

And the boy was thrown oﬀ the broomstick.
He seemed to move very slowly through the air, at ﬁrst.
“Wingardium Leviosa!” screamed Harry.
The spell failed. He could feel it fail.
There was a thud and a distant cracking sound, and the boy lay facedown on the grass in a heap.
Harry sheathed his wand and raced forward at full speed. He arrived
at the boy’s side at the same time as Madam Hooch, and Harry reached
into his pouch and tried to recall oh god what was the name never mind
he’d just try “Healer’s Pack!” and it popped up into his hand and—
“Broken wrist,” Madam Hooch said. “Calm down, boy, he just has
a broken wrist!”
There was a sort of mental lurch as Harry’s mind snapped out of
Panic Mode.
The Emergency Healing Pack Plus lay open in front of him, and
there was a syringe of liquid ﬁre in Harry’s hand, which would have
kept the boy’s brain oxygenated if he’d managed to snap his neck.
“Ah...” Harry said in a rather wavering sort of voice. His heart was
pounding so loudly that he almost couldn’t hear himself panting for
breath. “Broken bone... right... Setting String?”
“That’s for emergencies only,” snapped Madam Hooch. “Put it away,
he’s ﬁne.” She leaned over the boy, oﬀering him a hand. “Come on, boy,
it’s all right, up you get!”
“You’re not seriously going to make him ride the broomstick again?”
Harry said in horror.
Madam Hooch sent Harry a glare. “Of course not!” She pulled the
boy to his feet using his good arm—Harry saw with a shock that it was
Neville Longbottom again, what was with him?—and she turned to all
the watching children. “None of you is to move while I take this boy to
the hospital wing! You leave those brooms where they are or you’ll be
out of Hogwarts before you can say ‘Quidditch.’ Come on, dear.”
And Madam Hooch walked oﬀ with Neville, who was clutching his
wrist and trying to control his sniﬄes.
When they were out of earshot, one of the Slytherins started giggling.
That set oﬀ the others.
*

244 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

Harry turned and looked at them. It seemed like a good time to
memorize some faces.
And Harry saw that Draco was strolling toward him, accompanied
by Mr. Crabbe and Mr. Goyle. Mr. Crabbe wasn’t smiling. Mr. Goyle
decidedly was. Draco himself was wearing a very controlled face that
twitched occasionally, from which Harry inferred that Draco thought
it was hilarious but saw no political advantage to be gained by laughing
about it now instead of in the Slytherin dungeons afterward.
“Well, Potter,” Draco said in a low voice that didn’t carry, still with
that very controlled face that was twitching occasionally, “Just wanted to
say, when you take advantage of emergencies to demonstrate leadership,
you want to look like you’re in total control of the situation, rather
than, say, going into a complete panic.” Mr. Goyle giggled, and Draco
shot him a quelling look. “But you probably scored a few points anyway.
You need any help stowing that healer’s kit?”
Harry turned to look at the Healing Pack, which got his own face
turned away from Draco. “I think I’m ﬁne,” Harry said. He put the
syringe back in its place, redid the latches, and stood up.
Ernie Macmillan arrived just as Harry was feeding the pack back into
his mokeskin pouch.
“Thank you, Harry Potter, on behalf of Huﬄepuﬀ,” Ernie Macmillan said formally. “It was a good try and a good thought.”
“A good thought indeed,” drawled Draco. “Why didn’t anyone in
Huﬄepuﬀ have their wands out? Maybe if you’d all helped instead of
just Potter, you could’ve caught him. I thought Huﬄepuﬀs were supposed to stick together?”
Ernie looked like he was torn between getting angry and wanting to
die of shame. “We didn’t think of it in time—”
“Ah,” said Draco, “didn’t think of it, I guess that’s why it’s better to
have one Ravenclaw as a friend than all of Huﬄepuﬀ.”
Oh, hell, how was Harry supposed to juggle this one... “You’re not
helping,” Harry said in a mild tone. Hoping Draco would interpret that
as you’re interfering with my plans, please shut up.
“Hey, what’s this?” said Mr. Goyle. He stooped to the grass and
picked up something around the size of a large marble, a glass ball that
*

245 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

seemed to be ﬁlled with a swirling white mist.
Ernie blinked. “Neville’s Remembrall!”
“What’s a Remembrall?” asked Harry.
“It turns red if you’ve forgotten something,” Ernie said. “It doesn’t
tell you what you forgot, though. Give it here, please, and I’ll hand it
back to Neville later.” Ernie held out his hand.
A sudden grin ﬂashed across Mr. Goyle’s face and he spun around
and raced away.
Ernie stood still for a moment in surprise, and then shouted “Hey!”
and ran after Mr. Goyle.
And Mr. Goyle grabbed a broomstick, hopped on with one smooth
motion and took to the air.
Harry’s jaw dropped. Hadn’t Madam Hooch said that would get him
expelled?
“That idiot!” Draco hissed. He opened his mouth to shout—
“Hey!” shouted Ernie. “That’s Neville’s! Give it back!”
The Slytherins started cheering and hooting.
Draco’s mouth snapped shut. Harry caught the sudden look of indecision on his face.
“Draco,” Harry said in a low tone, “if you don’t order that idiot back
on the ground, the teacher’s going to get back and—”
“Come and get it, Huﬄepuﬄe!” shouted Mr. Goyle, and a great cheer
went up from the Slytherins.
“I can’t!” whispered Draco. “Everyone in Slytherin would think I’m
weak!”
“And if Mr. Goyle gets expelled,” hissed Harry, “your father is going
to think you’re a moron!”
Draco’s face twisted in agony.
At that moment—
“Hey, Slytherslime,” shouted Ernie, “didn’t anyone ever tell you that
Huﬄepuﬀs stick together? Wands out, Huﬄepuﬀ!”
And there were suddenly a whole lot of wands pointed in Mr. Goyle’s
direction.
Three seconds later—
“Wands out, Slytherin!” said around ﬁve diﬀerent Slytherins.
*

246 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

And there were a whole lot of wands pointed in Huﬄepuﬀ’s direction.
Two seconds later—
“Wands out, Gryﬃndor!”
“Do something, Potter!” whispered Draco. “I can’t be the one to stop
this it has to be you! I’ll owe you a favor just think of something aren’t you
supposed to be brilliant?”
In around ﬁve and a half seconds, realized Harry, someone was going
to cast the Sumerian Simple Strike Hex and by the time it was over and
the teachers were done expelling people the only boys left in his year
would be Ravenclaws.
“Wands out, Ravenclaw!” shouted Michael Corner who was apparently feeling left out of the disaster.
“Gregory Goyle!” screamed Harry. “I challenge you to a contest for
possession of Neville’s Remembrall!”
There was a sudden pause.
“Oh, really?” said Draco in the loudest drawl Harry had ever heard.
“That sounds interesting. What sort of contest, Potter?”
Er...
“Contest” had been as far as Harry’s inspiration had gotten. What
sort of contest, he couldn’t say “chess” because Draco wouldn’t be able
to accept without it looking strange, he couldn’t say “arm-wrestling”
because Mr. Goyle would crush him—
“How about this?” Harry said loudly. “Gregory Goyle and I stand
apart from each other, and no one else is allowed to come near either of
us. We don’t use our wands and neither does anyone else. I don’t move
from where I’m standing, and neither does he. And if I can get my hands
on Neville’s Remembrall, then Gregory Goyle relinquishes all claim to
that Remembrall he’s holding and gives it to me.”
There was another pause as people’s looks of relief transmuted to
confusion.
“Hah, Potter!” said Draco loudly. “I’d like to see you do that!
Mr. Goyle accepts!”
“It’s on!” said Harry.
“Potter, what?” whispered Draco, which he somehow did without
*

247 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

moving his lips.
Harry didn’t know how to answer without moving his.
People were putting their wands away, and Mr. Goyle swooped
gracefully to the ground, looking rather confused. Some Huﬄepuﬀs
started over toward Mr. Goyle, but Harry shot them a desperately pleading look and they backed oﬀ.
Harry moved forward toward Mr. Goyle and stopped when he was
a few paces away, far enough apart that they couldn’t reach each other.
Slowly, deliberately, Harry sheathed his wand.
Everyone else backed away.
Harry swallowed. He knew in broad outline what he wanted to do,
but it had to be done in such a way that no one understood what he’d
done—
“All right,” Harry said loudly. “And now...” He took a deep breath
and raised one hand, ﬁngers ready to snap. There were gasps from anyone who’d heard about the pies, which was practically everyone. “I call
upon the insanity of Hogwarts! Happy happy boom boom swamp swamp
swamp!” And Harry snapped his ﬁngers.
A lot of people ﬂinched.
And nothing happened.
Harry let the silence stretch on for a while, developing, until...
“Um,” someone said. “Is that it?”
Harry looked at the boy who’d spoken. “Look in front of you. You
see that patch of ground that looks barren, without any grass on it?”
“Um, yeah,” said the boy, a Gryﬃndor (Dean something?).
“Dig it up.”
Now Harry was getting a lot of strange looks.
“Er, why?” said Dean something.
“Just do it,” said Terry Boot in a weary voice. “No point asking why,
trust me on this one.”
Dean something kneeled down and began to scoop away dirt.
After a minute or so, Dean stood up again. “There’s nothing there,”
Dean said.
Huh. Harry had been planning to go back in time and bury a treasure map that would lead to another treasure map that would lead to
*

248 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

Neville’s Remembrall which he would put there after getting it back
from Mr. Goyle...
Then Harry realized there was a much simpler way which didn’t
threaten the secret of Time-Turners quite as much.
“Thanks, Dean!” Harry said loudly. “Ernie, would you look around
on the ground where Neville fell and see if you can ﬁnd Neville’s Remembrall?”
People looked even more confused.
“Just do it,” said Terry Boot. “He’ll keep trying until something
works, and the scary thing is that—”
“Merlin!” gasped Ernie. He was holding up Neville’s Remembrall.
“It’s here! Right where he fell!”
“What?” cried Mr. Goyle. He looked down and saw...
...that he was still holding Neville’s Remembrall.
There was a rather long pause.
“Er,” said Dean something, “that’s not possible, is it?”
“It’s a plot hole,” said Harry. “I made myself weird enough to distract
the universe for a moment and it forgot that Goyle had already picked
up the Remembrall.”
“No, wait, I mean, that’s totally not possible—”
“Excuse me, are we all standing around here waiting to go ﬂying on
broomsticks? Yes we are. So shut up. Anyway, once I get my hands
on Neville’s Remembrall, the contest is over and Gregory Goyle has
to relinquish all claim to the Remembrall he’s holding and give it to
me. Those were the terms, remember?” Harry stretched out a hand and
beckoned Ernie. “Just roll it over here, since no one’s supposed to get
close to me, okay?”
“Hold on!” shouted a Slytherin—Blaise Zabini, Harry wasn’t likely
to forget that name. “How do we know that’s Neville’s Remembrall?
You could’ve just dropped another Remembrall there—”
“The Slytherin is strong with this one,” Harry said, smiling. “But
you have my word that the one Ernie’s holding is Neville’s. No comment about the one Gregory Goyle’s holding.”
Zabini spun to Draco. “Malfoy! You’re not just going to let him get
away with that—”
*

249 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

“Shut up, you,” rumbled Mr. Crabbe, standing behind Draco. “Mister Malfoy doesn’t need you to tell him what to do!”
Good minion.
“My bet was with Draco, of the Noble and Most Ancient House of
Malfoy,” Harry said. “Not with you, Zabini. I have done what Mr. Malfoy said he’d like to see me do, and as for the judgment of the bet, I leave
that up to Mr. Malfoy.” Harry inclined his head toward Draco and raised
his eyebrows slightly. That ought to allow Draco to save enough face.
There was a pause.
“You promise that actually is Neville’s Remembrall?” Draco said.
“Yes,” Harry said. “That’s the one that’ll go back to Neville and it
was his originally. And the one Gregory Goyle’s holding goes to me.”
Draco nodded, looking decisive. “I won’t question the word of the
Noble House of Potter, then, no matter how strange that all was. And
the Noble and Most Ancient House of Malfoy keeps its word as well.
Mr. Goyle, give that to Mr. Potter—”
“Hey!” Zabini said. “He hasn’t won yet, he hasn’t got his hands on—”
“Catch, Harry!” said Ernie, and he tossed the Remembrall.
Harry easily snapped the Remembrall out of the air, he’d always had
good reﬂexes that way. “There,” said Harry, “I win...”
Harry trailed oﬀ. All conversation stopped.
The Remembrall was glowing bright red in his hand, blazing like a
miniature sun that cast shadows on the ground in broad daylight.

**
*
Thursday.
If you wanted to be speciﬁc, 5:09pm on Thursday afternoon, in Professor McGonagall’s oﬃce, after ﬂying classes. (With an extra hour for
Harry slipped in between.)
Professor McGonagall sitting on her stool. Harry in the hot seat in
front of her desk.
“Professor,” Harry said tightly, “Slytherin was pointing their wands
at Huﬄepuﬀ, Gryﬃndor was pointing their wands at Slytherin, some
*

250 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

idiot called wands out in Ravenclaw, and I had maybe ﬁve seconds to
keep the whole thing from blowing sky-high! It was all I could think
of!”
Professor McGonagall’s face was pinched and angry. “You are not to
use the Time-Turner in that fashion, Mr. Potter! Is the concept of secrecy
not something that you understand?”
“They don’t know how I did it! They just think I can do really weird
things by snapping my ﬁngers! I’ve done other weird stuﬀ that can’t be
done with Time-Turners even, and I’ll do more stuﬀ like that, and this
case won’t even stand out! I had to do it, Professor!”
“You did not have to do it!” snapped Professor McGonagall. “All
you needed to do was get this anonymous Slytherin back on the ground
and the wands put away! You could have challenged him to a game of
Exploding Snap but no, you had to use the Time-Turner in a ﬂagrant
and unnecessary manner!”
“It was all I could think of! I don’t even know what Exploding Snap
is, they wouldn’t have accepted a game of chess and if I’d picked armwresting I would have lost!”
“Then you should have picked wrestling!”
Harry blinked. “But then I’d have lost—”
Harry stopped.
Professor McGonagall was looking very angry.
“I’m sorry, Professor McGonagall,” Harry said in a small voice. “I
honestly didn’t think of that, and you’re right, I should have, it would
have been brilliant if I had, but I just didn’t think of that at all...”
Harry’s voice trailed oﬀ. It was suddenly apparent to him that he’d
had a lot of other options. He could have asked Draco to suggest something, he could have asked the crowd... his use of the Time-Turner had
been ﬂagrant and unnecessary. There had been a giant space of possibilities, why had he picked that one?
Because he’d seen a way to win. Win possession of an unimportant
trinket that the teachers would’ve taken back from Mr. Goyle anyway.
Intent to win. That was what had gotten him.
“I’m sorry,” Harry said again. “For my pride and my stupidity.”
Professor McGonagall wiped a hand across her forehead. Some of
*

251

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

her anger seemed to dissipate. But her voice still came out very hard.
“One more display like that, Mr. Potter, and you will be returning that
Time-Turner. Do I make myself very clear?”
“Yes,” Harry said. “I understand and I’m sorry.”
“Then, Mr. Potter, you will be allowed to retain the Time-Turner for
now. And considering the size of the debacle you did, in fact, avert, I
will not deduct any points from Ravenclaw.”
Plus you couldn’t explain why you’d deducted the points. But Harry
wasn’t dumb enough to say that out loud.
“More importantly, why did the Remembrall go oﬀ like that?” Harry
said. “Does it mean I’ve been Obliviated?”
“That puzzles me as well,” Professor McGonagall said slowly. “If it
were that simple, I would think that the courts would use Remembralls,
and they do not. I shall look into it, Mr. Potter.” She sighed. “You can
go now.”
Harry started to get up from his chair, then halted. “Um, sorry, I
did have something else I wanted to tell you—”
You could hardly see the ﬂinch. “What is it, Mr. Potter?”
“It’s about Professor Quirrell—”
“I’m sure, Mr. Potter, that it is nothing of importance.” Professor
McGonagall spoke the words in a great rush. “Surely you heard the
Headmaster tell the students that you were not to bother us with any
unimportant complaints about the Defense Professor?”
Harry was rather confused. “But this could be important, yesterday
I got this sudden sense of doom when—”
“Mr. Potter! I have a sense of doom as well! And my sense of doom
is suggesting that you must not ﬁnish that sentence!”
Harry’s mouth gaped open. Professor McGonagall had succeeded;
Harry was speechless.
“Mr. Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, “if you have discovered
anything that seems interesting about Professor Quirrell, please feel free
not to share it with me or anyone else. Now I think you’ve taken up
enough of my valuable time—”
“This isn’t like you!” Harry burst out. “I’m sorry but that just seems
unbelievably irresponsible! From what I’ve heard there’s some kind of
*

252 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

jinx on the Defense position, and if you already know something’s going
to go wrong, I’d think you’d all be on your toes—”
“Go wrong, Mr. Potter? I certainly hope not.” Professor McGonagall’s face was expressionless. “After Professor Blake was caught in a
closet with no fewer than three ﬁfth-year Slytherins last February, and a
year before that, Professor Summers failed so completely as an educator
that her students thought a boggart was a kind of furniture, it would be
catastrophic if some problem with the extraordinarily competent Professor Quirrell came to my attention now, and I daresay most of our
students would fail their Defense O.W.L.s and N.E.W.T.s.”
“I see,” Harry said slowly, taking it all in. “So in other words, whatever’s wrong with Professor Quirrell, you desperately don’t want to
know about it until the end of the school year. And since it’s currently
September, he could assassinate the Prime Minister on live television and
get away with it so far as you’re concerned.”
Professor McGonagall gazed at him unblinkingly. “I am certain that
I could never be heard endorsing such a statement, Mr. Potter. At Hogwarts we strive to be proactive with respect to anything that threatens
the educational attainment of our students.”
Such as ﬁrst-year Ravenclaws who can’t keep their mouths shut. “I believe I understand you completely, Professor McGonagall.”
“Oh, I doubt that, Mr. Potter. I doubt that very much.” Professor
McGonagall leaned forward, her face tightening again. “Since you and
I have already discussed matters far more sensitive than these, I shall
speak frankly. You, and you alone, have reported this mysterious sense
of doom. You, and you alone, are a chaos magnet the likes of which
I have never seen. After our little shopping trip to Diagon Alley, and
then the Sorting Hat, and then today’s little episode, I can well foresee
that I am fated to sit in the Headmaster’s oﬃce and hear some hilarious
tale about Professor Quirrell in which you and you alone play a starring
role, after which there will be no choice but to ﬁre him. I am already
resigned to it, Mr. Potter. And if this sad event takes place any earlier
than the Ides of May, I will string you up by the gates of Hogwarts with
your own intestines and pour ﬁre beetles into your nose. Now do you
understand me completely?”
*

253 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

Harry nodded, his eyes very wide. Then, after a second, “What do I
get if I can make it happen on the last day of the school year?”
“Get out of my oﬃce!”

**
*
Thursday.
There must have been something about Thursdays in Hogwarts.
It was 5:32pm on Thursday afternoon, and Harry was standing next
to Professor Flitwick, in front of the great stone gargoyle that guarded
the entrance to the Headmaster’s oﬃce.
No sooner had he made it back from Professor McGonagall’s ofﬁce to the Ravenclaw study rooms than one of the students told him to
report to Professor Flitwick’s oﬃce, and there Harry had learned that
Dumbledore wanted to speak to him.
Harry, feeling rather apprehensive, had asked Professor Flitwick if
the Headmaster had said what this was about.
Professor Flitwick had shrugged in a helpless sort of way.
Apparently Dumbledore had said that Harry was far too young to
invoke the words of power and madness.
Happy happy boom boom swamp swamp swamp? Harry had thought
but not said aloud.
“Please don’t worry too much, Mr. Potter,” squeaked Professor
Flitwick from somewhere around Harry’s shoulder level. (Harry was
grateful for Professor Flitwick’s gigantic puﬀy beard, it was hard getting
used to a Professor who was not only shorter than him but spoke in a
higher-pitched voice.) “Headmaster Dumbledore may seem a little odd,
or a lot odd, or even extremely odd, but he has never hurt a student in
the slightest, and I don’t believe he ever will.” Professor Flitwick gave
Harry an encouraging smile. “Just keep that in mind at all times and
you’ll be sure not to panic!”
This was not helping.
“Good luck!” squeaked Professor Flitwick, and leaned over to the
gargoyle and said something that Harry somehow failed to hear at all.
*

254 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

(Of course, the password wouldn’t be much good if you could hear someone saying it.) And the stone gargoyle walked aside with a very natural
and ordinary movement that Harry found rather shocking, since the
gargoyle still looked like solid, immovable stone the whole time.
Behind the gargoyle was a set of slowly revolving spiral stairs. There
was something disturbingly hypnotic about it, and even more disturbing
was that revolving the spiral ought not to take you anywhere.
“Up you go!” squeaked Flitwick.
Harry rather nervously stepped onto the spiral, and found himself,
for some reason that his brain couldn’t seem to visualize at all, moving
upward.
The gargoyle thudded back into place behind him, and the spiral
stairs kept turning and Harry kept being higher up, and after a rather
dizzying time, Harry found himself in front of an oak door with a brass
griﬃn knocker.
Harry reached out and turned the doorknob.
The door swung open.
And Harry saw the most interesting room he’d ever seen in his life.
There were tiny metal mechanisms that whirred or ticked or slowly
changed shape or emitted little puﬀs of smoke. There were dozens of
mysterious ﬂuids in dozens of oddly shaped containers, all bubbling,
boiling, oozing, changing color, or forming into interesting shapes that
vanished half a second after you saw them. There were things that looked
like clocks with many hands, inscribed with numbers or in unrecognizable languages. There was a bracelet bearing a lenticular crystal that
sparkled with a thousand colors, and a bird perched atop a golden platform, and a wooden cup ﬁlled with what looked like blood, and a statue
of a falcon encrusted in black enamel. The wall was all hung with pictures of people sleeping, and the Sorting Hat was casually poised on a
hatrack that was also holding two umbrellas and three red slippers for
left feet.
In the midst of all the chaos was a clean black oaken desk. Before
the desk was an oaken stool. And behind the desk was a well-cushioned
throne containing Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore, who was
adorned with a long silver beard, a hat like a squashed giant mushroom,
*

255 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

and what looked to Muggle eyes like three layers of bright pink pajamas.
Dumbledore was smiling, and his bright eyes twinkled with a mad
intensity.
With some trepidation, Harry seated himself in front of the desk.
The door swung shut behind him with a loud thunk.
“Hello, Harry,” said Dumbledore.
“Hello, Headmaster,” Harry replied. So they were on a ﬁrst-name
basis? Would Dumbledore now say to call him—
“Please, Harry!” said Dumbledore. “Headmaster sounds so formal.
Just call me Heh for short.”
“I’ll be sure to, Heh,” said Harry.
There was a slight pause.
“Do you know,” said Dumbledore, “you’re the ﬁrst person who’s
ever taken me up on that?”
“Ah...” Harry said. He tried to control his voice despite the sudden
sinking feeling in his stomach. “I’m sorry, I, ah, Headmaster, you told
me to do it so I did—”
“Heh, please!” said Dumbledore cheerfully. “And there’s no call to be
so worried, I won’t launch you out a window just because you make one
mistake. I’ll give you plenty of warnings ﬁrst, if you’re doing something
wrong! Besides, what matters isn’t how people talk to you, it’s what
they think of you.”
He’s never hurt a student, just keep remembering that and you’ll be sure
not to panic.
Dumbledore drew forth a small metal case and ﬂipped it open, showing some small yellow lumps. “Lemon drop?” said the Headmaster.
“Er, no thank you, Heh,” said Harry. Does slipping a student lsd count
as hurting them, or does that fall into the category of harmless fun? “You,
um, said something about my being too young to invoke the words of
power and madness?”
“That you most certainly are!” Dumbledore said. “Thankfully the
Words of Power and Madness were lost seven centuries ago and no one
has the slightest idea what they are anymore. It was just a little remark.”
“Ah...” Harry said. He was aware that his mouth was hanging open.
“Why did you call me here, then?”
*

256 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

“Why?” Dumbledore repeated. “Ah, Harry, if I went around all day
asking why I do things, I’d never have time to get a single thing done!
I’m quite a busy person, you know.”
Harry nodded, smiling. “Yes, it was a very impressive list. Headmaster of Hogwarts, Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot, and Supreme
Mugwump of the International Confederation of Wizards. Sorry to ask
but I was wondering, is it possible to get more than six hours if you
use more than one Time-Turner? Because it’s pretty impressive if you’re
doing all that on just thirty hours a day.”
There was another slight pause, during which Harry went on smiling. He was a little apprehensive, actually a lot apprehensive, but once it
had become clear that Dumbledore was deliberately messing with him,
something within him absolutely refused to sit and take it like a defenseless lump.
“I’m afraid Time doesn’t like being stretched out too much,” said
Dumbledore after the slight pause, “and yet we ourselves seem to be a
little too large for it, and so it’s a constant struggle to ﬁt our lives into
Time.”
“Indeed,” Harry said with grave solemnity. “That’s why it’s best to
come to our points quickly.”
For a moment Harry wondered if he’d gone too far.
Then Dumbledore chuckled. “Straight to the point it shall be.”
The Headmaster leaned forward, tilting his squashed mushroom hat and
brushing his beard against his desk. “Harry, this Monday you did something that should have been impossible even with a Time-Turner. Or
rather, impossible with only a Time-Turner. Where did those two pies
come from, I wonder?”
A jolt of adrenaline shot through Harry. He’d done that using the
Cloak of Invisibility, the one that had been given him in a Christmas box
along with a note, and that note had said: If Dumbledore realized that you
possessed one of the Deathly Hallows he would certainly never allow it out
of his grasp...
“A natural thought,” Dumbledore went on, “is that since none of
the ﬁrst-years present were able to cast such a spell, someone else was
present, and yet unseen. And if no one could see them, why, it would be
*

257 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

easy enough for them to throw the pies. One might further suspect that
since you had a Time-Turner, you were the invisible one; and that since
the spell of Disillusionment is far beyond your current abilities, you had
an invisibility cloak.” Dumbledore smiled conspiratorily. “Am I on the
right track so far, Harry?”
Harry was frozen. He had the feeling that an outright lie would not
at all be wise, and possibly not the least bit helpful, and he couldn’t think
of anything else to say.
Dumbledore waved a friendly hand. “Don’t worry, Harry, you
haven’t done anything wrong. Invisibility cloaks aren’t against the
rules—I suppose they’re rare enough that no one ever got around to
putting them on the list. But really I was wondering something else
entirely.”
“Oh?” Harry said in the most normal voice he could manage.
Dumbledore’s eyes shone with enthusiasm. “You see, Harry, after
you’ve been through a few adventures you tend to catch the hang of these
things. You start to see the pattern, hear the rhythm of the world. You
begin to harbor suspicions before the moment of revelation. You are the
Boy-Who-Lived, and somehow an invisibility cloak made its way into
your hands only four days after you discovered our magical Britain. Such
cloaks are not for sale in Diagon Alley, but there is one which might ﬁnd
its own way to a destined wearer. And so I cannot help but wonder if by
some strange chance you have found not just an invisibility cloak, but
the Cloak of Invisibility, one of the three Deathly Hallows and reputed
to hide the wearer from the gaze of Death himself.” Dumbledore’s gaze
was bright and eager. “May I see it, Harry?”
Harry swallowed. There was a full ﬂood of adrenaline in his system
now and it was entirely useless, this was the most powerful wizard in
the world and there was no way he could make it out the door and there
was nowhere in Hogwarts for him to hide if he did, he was about to lose
the Cloak that had been passed down through the Potters for who knew
how long—
Slowly Dumbledore leaned back into his high chair. The bright light
had gone out of his eyes, and he looked puzzled and a little sorrowful.
“Harry,” said Dumbledore, “if you don’t want to, you can just say no.”
*

258 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

“I can?” Harry croaked.
“Yes, Harry,” said Dumbledore. His voice sounded sad now, and
worried. “It seems that you’re afraid of me, Harry. May I ask what I’ve
done to earn your distrust?”
Harry swallowed. “Is there some way you can swear a binding magical oath that you won’t take my cloak?”
Dumbledore shook his head slowly. “Unbreakable Vows are not to
be used so lightly. And besides, Harry, if you did not already know the
spell, you would have only my word that the spell was binding. Yet
surely you realize that I do not need your permission to see the Cloak.
I am powerful enough to draw it forth myself, mokeskin pouch or no.”
Dumbledore’s face was very grave. “But this I will not do. The Cloak
is yours, Harry. I will not seize it from you. Not even to look at for
just a moment, unless you decide to show it to me. That is a promise
and an oath. Should I need to prohibit you from using it on the school
grounds, I will require you to go to your vault at Gringotts and store it
there.”
“Ah...” Harry said. He swallowed hard, trying to calm the ﬂood of
adrenaline and think reasonably. He took the mokeskin pouch oﬀ his
belt. “If you really don’t need my permission... then you have it.” Harry
held out the pouch to Dumbledore, and bit down hard on his lip, sending
that signal to himself in case he was Obliviated afterward.
The old wizard reached into the pouch, and without saying any word
of retrieval, drew forth the Cloak of Invisibility.
“Ah,” breathed Dumbledore. “I was right...” He poured the shimmering black velvet mesh through his hand. “Centuries old, and still as
perfect as the day it was made. We have lost much of our art over the
years, and now I cannot make such a thing myself, no one can. I can feel
the power of it like an echo in my mind, like a song forever being sung
without anyone to hear it...” The wizard looked up from the Cloak.
“Do not sell it,” he said, “do not give it to anyone as a possession. Think
twice before you show it to anyone, and ponder three times again before
you reveal it is a Deathly Hallow. Treat it with respect, for this is indeed
a Thing of Power.”
For a moment Dumbledore’s face grew wistful...
*

259 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

...and then he handed the Cloak back to Harry.
Harry put it back in his pouch.
Dumbledore’s face was grave once more. “May I ask again, Harry,
how you came to distrust me so?”
Suddenly Harry felt rather ashamed.
“There was a note with the Cloak,” Harry said in a small voice. “It
said that you would try to take the Cloak from me, if you knew. I don’t
know who left the note, though, I really don’t.”
“I... see,” Dumbledore said slowly. “Well, Harry, I won’t impugn
the motives of whoever left you that note. Who knows but that they
themselves may have had the best of good intentions? They did give you
the Cloak, after all.”
Harry nodded, impressed by Dumbledore’s charity, and abashed at
the sharp contrast with his own attitude.
The old wizard went on. “But you and I are both gamepieces of the
same color, I think. The boy who ﬁnally defeated Voldemort, and the
old man who held him oﬀ long enough for you to save the day. I will
not hold your caution against you, Harry, we must all do our best to be
wise. I will only ask that you think twice and ponder three times again,
the next time someone tells you to distrust me.”
“I’m sorry,” Harry said. He felt wretched at this point, he’d just told
oﬀ Gandalf essentially, and Dumbledore’s kindness was only making
him feel worse. “I shouldn’t have distrusted you.”
“Alas, Harry, in this world...” The old wizard shook his head. “I
cannot even say you were unwise. You did not know me. And in truth
there are some at Hogwarts who you would do well not to trust. Perhaps
even some you call friends.”
Harry swallowed. That sounded rather ominous. “Like who?”
Dumbledore stood up from his chair, and began examining one of
his instruments, a dial with eight hands of varying length.
After a few moments, the old wizard spoke again. “He probably
seems to you quite charming,” said Dumbledore. “Polite—to you at least.
Well-spoken, maybe even admiring. Always ready with a helping hand,
a favor, a word of advice—”
“Oh, Draco Malfoy!” Harry said, feeling rather relieved that it wasn’t
*

260 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

Hermione or something. “Oh no, no no no, you’ve got it all wrong,
he’s not turning me, I’m turning him.”
Dumbledore froze where he was peering at the dial. “You’re what?”
“I’m going to turn Draco Malfoy from the Dark Side,” Harry said.
“You know, make him a good guy.”
Dumbledore straightened and turned to Harry. He was wearing one
of the most astonished expressions Harry had ever seen on anyone, let
alone someone with a long silver beard. “Are you certain,” said the old
wizard after a moment, “that whatever goodness you think you see in
him is not just wishful thinking, Harry? I fear that what you see is only
the lure, the bait—”
“Er, not likely,” Harry said. “I mean if he’s trying to disguise himself
as a good guy he’s incredibly bad at it. This isn’t a question of Draco
coming up to me and being all charming and me deciding that he must
have a hidden core of goodness deep down. I’m targeting him for redemption speciﬁcally because he’s the heir to House Malfoy and if you
had to pick one person to redeem, it would obviously be him.”
Dumbledore’s left eye twitched. “You’re trying to plant the seeds of
love and kindness in Draco’s heart because you expect the heir of Malfoy
to prove valuable to you?”
“Not just to me!” Harry said indignantly. “To all of magical Britain,
if this works out! And he’ll have a happier and mentally healthier life
himself! Look, I don’t have enough time to turn everyone away from
the Dark Side and I’ve got to ask where the Light can gain the most
advantage the fastest—”
Dumbledore started laughing. Laughing a lot harder than Harry
would expect, almost howling. It seemed positively undigniﬁed. An
ancient and powerful wizard ought to chuckle in deep booming tones,
not laugh so hard he was gasping for breath. Harry had once literally
fallen out of his chair while watching the Marx Brothers movie Duck
Soup, and that was how hard Dumbledore was laughing now.
“It’s not that funny,” Harry said after a while. He was starting to
worry about Dumbledore’s sanity again.
Dumbledore got himself under control again with a visible eﬀort.
“Ah, Harry, one symptom of the disease called wisdom is that you begin
*

261

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

laughing at things that no one else thinks is funny, because when you’re
wise, Harry, you start getting the jokes!” The old wizard wiped tears
away from his eyes. “Ah, me. Ah, me. Oft evil will shall evil mar
indeed, in very deed.”
Harry’s brain took a moment to place the familiar words... “Hey,
that’s a Tolkien quote! Gandalf says that!”
“Theoden, actually,” said Dumbledore.
“You’re Muggleborn?” Harry said in shock.
“I’m afraid not,” said Dumbledore, smiling again. “I was born seventy years before that book was published, dear child. But it seems that
my Muggleborn students tend to think alike in certain ways. I have
accumulated no fewer than twenty copies of The Lord of the Rings and
three sets of Tolkien’s entire collected works, and I treasure every one
of them.” Dumbledore drew his wand and held it up and struck a pose.
“You cannot pass! How does that look?”
“Ah,” Harry said in something approaching complete brain shutdown, “I think you’re missing a Balrog.” And the pink pajamas and
squashed mushroom hat were not helping in the slightest.
“I see.” Dumbledore sighed and glumly sheathed the wand in his belt.
“I fear there have been precious few Balrogs in my life of late. Nowadays it’s all meetings of the Wizengamot where I must try desperately
to prevent any work from getting done, and formal dinners where foreign politicians compete to see who can be the most obstinate fool. And
being mysterious at people, knowing things I have no way of knowing,
making cryptic statements which can only be understood in hindsight,
and all the other small ways in which powerful wizards amuse themselves after they have left the part of the pattern that allows them to be
heroes. Speaking of which, Harry, I have a certain something to give
you, something which belonged to your father.”
“You do?” said Harry. “Gosh, who would have ﬁgured.”
“Yes indeed,” said Dumbledore. “I suppose it is a little predictable,
isn’t it?” His face turned solemn. “Nonetheless...”
Dumbledore went back to his desk and sat down, pulling out one of
the drawers as he did so. He reached in using both arms, and, straining
slightly, pulled a rather large and heavy-looking object out of the drawer,
*

262 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

which he then deposited on his oaken desk with a huge thunk.
“This,” Dumbledore said, “was your father’s rock.”
Harry stared at it. It was light gray, discolored, irregularly shaped,
sharp-edged, and very much a plain old ordinary large rock. Dumbledore had deposited it so that it rested on the widest available crosssection, but it still wobbled unstably on his desk.
Harry looked up. “This is a joke, right?”
“It is not,” said Dumbledore, shaking his head and looking very serious. “I took this from the ruins of James and Lily’s home in Godric’s
Hollow, where also I found you; and I have kept it from then until now,
against the day when I could give it to you.”
In the mixture of hypotheses that served as Harry’s model of the
world, Dumbledore’s insanity was rapidly rising in probability. But
there was still a substantial amount of probability allocated to other alternatives... “Um, is it a magical rock?”
“Not so far as I know,” said Dumbledore. “But I advise you with
the greatest possible stringency to keep it close about your person at all
times.”
All right. Dumbledore was probably insane but if he wasn’t... well, it
would be just too embarrassing to get in trouble from ignoring the advice
of the inscrutable old wizard. That had to be like #4 on the list of the
Top 100 Obvious Failure Modes.
Harry stepped forward and put his hands on the rock, trying to ﬁnd
some angle from which to lift it without cutting himself. “I’ll put it in
my pouch, then.”
Dumbledore frowned. “That may not be close enough to your person. And what if your mokeskin pouch is lost, or stolen?”
“You think I should just carry a big rock everywhere I go?”
Dumbledore gave Harry a serious look. “That might prove wise.”
“Ah...” Harry said. It looked rather heavy. “I’d think the other students would tend to ask me questions about that.”
“Tell them I ordered you to do it,” said Dumbledore. “No one will
question that, since they all think I’m insane.” His face was still perfectly
serious.
“Er, to be honest if you go around ordering your students to carry
*

263 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

large rocks I can kind of see why people would think that.”
“Ah, Harry,” said Dumbledore. The old wizard gestured, a sweep of
one hand that seemed to take in all the mysterious instruments around
the room. “When we are young we believe that we know everything,
and so we believe that if we see no explanation for something, then no
explanation exists. When we are older we realize that the whole universe
works by a rhythm and a reason, even if we ourselves do not know it. It
is only our own ignorance which appears to us as insanity.”
“Reality is always lawful,” said Harry, “even if we don’t know the
law.”
“Precisely, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “To understand this—and I see
that you do understand it—is the essence of wisdom.”
“So... why do I have to carry this rock exactly?”
“I can’t think of a reason, actually,” said Dumbledore.
“...you can’t.”
Dumbledore nodded. “But just because I can’t think of a reason
doesn’t mean there is no reason.”
The instruments ticked on.
“Okay,” said Harry, “I’m not even sure if I should be saying this, but
that is simply not the correct way to deal with our admitted ignorance
of how the universe works.”
“It isn’t?” said the old wizard, looking surprised and disappointed.
Harry had the feeling this conversation was not going to work out
in his favor, but he carried on regardless. “No. I don’t even know if that
fallacy has an oﬃcial name, but if I had to make one up myself, it would
be ‘privileging the hypothesis’ or something like that. How can I put
this formally... um... suppose you had a million boxes, and only one of
the boxes contained a diamond. And you had a box full of diamonddetectors, and each diamond-detector always went oﬀ in the presence
of a diamond, and went oﬀ half the time on boxes that didn’t have a
diamond. If you ran twenty detectors over all the boxes, you’d have,
on average, one false candidate and one true candidate left. And then it
would just take one or two more detectors before you were left with the
one true candidate. The point being that when there are lots of possible
answers, most of the evidence you need goes into just locating the true
*

264 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

hypothesis out of millions of possibilities—bringing it to your attention
in the ﬁrst place. The amount of evidence you need to judge between
two or three plausible candidates is much smaller by comparison. So
if you just jump ahead without evidence and promote one particular
possibility to the focus of your attention, you’re skipping over most of
the work. Like, you live in a city where there are a million people, and
there’s a murder, and a detective says, well, we’ve got no evidence at all,
so have we considered the possibility that Mortimer Snodgrass did it?”
“Did he?” said Dumbledore.
“No,” said Harry. “But later it turns out that the murderer had black
hair, and Mortimer has black hair, so everyone’s like, ah, looks like Mortimer did it after all. So it’s unfair to Mortimer for the police to promote
him to their attention without having good reasons already in hand to
suspect him. When there are lots of possibilities, most of the work goes
into just locating the true answer—starting to pay attention to it. You
don’t need proof, or the sort of oﬃcial evidence that scientists or courts
demand, but you need some sort of hint, and that hint has to discriminate that particular possibility from the millions of others. Otherwise
you can’t just pluck the right answer out of thin air. You can’t even
pluck a possibility worth thinking about out of thin air. And there’s
got to be a million other things I could do besides carrying around my
father’s rock. Just because I’m ignorant about the universe doesn’t mean
that I’m unsure about how I should reason in the presence of my uncertainty. The laws for thinking with probabilities are no less iron than
the laws that govern old-fashioned logic, and what you just did is not
allowed.” Harry paused. “Unless, of course, you have some hint you’re
not mentioning.”
“Ah,” said Dumbledore. He tapped his cheek, looking thoughtful.
“An interesting argument, certainly, but doesn’t it break down at the
point where you make an analogy between a million potential murderers
only one of whom committed the murder, and taking one out of many
possible courses of action, when many possible courses of action may
all be wise? I do not say that carrying your father’s rock is the one best
possible course of action, only that it is wiser to do than not.”
Dumbledore once again reached into the same desk drawer he had ac*

265 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

cessed earlier, this time seeming to root around inside—at least his arm
seemed to be moving. “I will remark,” Dumbledore said while Harry
was still trying to sort out how to reply to this completely unexpected
rejoinder, “that it is a common misconception of Ravenclaws that all the
smart children are Sorted there, leaving none for other Houses. This is
not so; being Sorted to Ravenclaw indicates that you are driven by your
desire to know things, which is not at all the same quality as being intelligent.” The wizard was smiling as he bent over the drawer. “Nonetheless,
you do seem rather intelligent. Less like an ordinary young hero and
more like a young mysterious ancient wizard. I think I may have been
taking the wrong approach with you, Harry, and that you may be able
to understand things that few others could grasp. So I shall be daring,
and oﬀer you a certain other heirloom.”
“You don’t mean...” gasped Harry. “My father... owned another
rock?”
“Excuse me,” said Dumbledore, “I am still older and more mysterious than you and if there are any revelations to be made then I will do
the revealing, thank you... oh, where is that thing!” Dumbledore reached
down further into the desk drawer, and still further. His head and shoulders and whole torso disappeared inside until only his hips and legs were
sticking out, as though the desk drawer was eating him.
Harry couldn’t help but wonder just how much stuﬀ was in there
and what the complete inventory would look like.
Finally Dumbledore rose back up out of the drawer, holding the objective of his search, which he set down on the desk alongside the rock.
It was a used, ragged-edged, worn-spined textbook: Intermediate Potion Making by Libatius Borage. There was a picture of a smoking vial
on the cover.
“This,” Dumbledore intoned, “was your mother’s ﬁfth-year Potions
textbook.”
“Which I am to carry with me at all times,” said Harry.
“Which holds a terrible secret. A secret whose revelation could prove
so disastrous that I must ask you to swear—and I do require you to swear
it seriously, Harry, whatever you may think of all this—never to tell
anyone or anything else.”
*

266 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

Harry considered his mother’s ﬁfth-year Potions textbook, which,
apparently, held a terrible secret.
The problem was that Harry did take that oaths like that very seriously. Any vow was an Unbreakable Vow if made by the right sort of
person.
And...
“I’m feeling thirsty,” Harry said, “and that is not at all a good sign.”
Dumbledore entirely failed to ask any questions about this cryptic
statement. “Do you swear, Harry?” said Dumbledore. His eyes gazed
intently into Harry’s. “Otherwise I cannot tell you.”
“Yes,” said Harry. “I swear.” That was the trouble with being a
Ravenclaw. You couldn’t refuse an oﬀer like that or your curiosity
would eat you alive, and everyone else knew it.
“And I swear in turn,” said Dumbledore, “that what I am about to
tell you is the truth.”
Dumbledore opened the book, seemingly at random, and Harry
leaned in to see.
“Do you see these notes,” Dumbledore said in a voice so low it was
almost a whisper, “written in the margins of the book?”
Harry squinted slightly. The yellowing pages seemed to be describing something called a potion of eagle’s splendor, many of the ingredients
being items that Harry didn’t recognize at all and whose names didn’t
appear to derive from English. Scrawled in the margin was a handwritten annotation saying, I wonder what would happen if you used thestral
blood here instead of blueberries? and immediately beneath was a reply in
diﬀerent handwriting, You’d get sick for weeks and maybe die.
“I see them,” said Harry. “What about them?”
Dumbledore pointed to the second scrawl. “The ones in this handwriting,” he said, still in that low voice, “were written by your mother.
And the ones in this handwriting,” moving his ﬁnger to indicate the ﬁrst
scrawl, “were written by me. I would turn myself invisible and sneak
into her dorm room while she was sleeping. Lily thought one of her
friends was the one writing them and they had the most amazing ﬁghts.”
That was the exact point at which Harry realized that the Headmaster of Hogwarts was, in fact, crazy.
*

267 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

Dumbledore was looking at him with a serious expression. “Do you
understand the implications of what I have just told you, Harry?”
“Ehhh...” Harry said. His voice seemed to be stuck. “Sorry... I... not
really...”
“Ah well,” said Dumbledore, and sighed. “I suppose your intelligence
has limits after all, then. It seems I was greatly premature in my enthusiasm. Shall we all just pretend I didn’t say anything incriminating?”
Harry rose from his chair, wearing a ﬁxed smile. “Of course,” Harry
said. “You know it’s actually getting rather late in the day and I’m a bit
hungry, so I should be going down to dinner, really” and Harry made a
beeline for the door.
The doorknob entirely failed to turn.
“You wound me, Harry,” said Dumbledore’s voice in quiet tones that
were coming from right behind him. “Do you not at least realize that
what I have told you is a sign of trust?”
Harry slowly turned around.
In front of him was a very powerful and very insane wizard with a
long silver beard, a hat like a squashed giant mushroom, and wearing
what looked to Muggle eyes like three layers of bright pink pajamas.
Behind him was a door that didn’t seem to be working at the moment.
Dumbledore was looking rather saddened and weary, like he wanted
to lean on a wizard’s staﬀ he didn’t have. “Really,” said Dumbledore,
“you try anything new instead of following the same pattern every time
for a hundred and ten years, and people all start running away.” The old
wizard shook his head in sorrow. “I’d hoped for better from you, Harry
Potter. I’d heard that your own friends also think you mad. I know they
are mistaken. Will you not believe the same of me?”
“Please open the door,” Harry said, his voice trembling. “If you ever
want me to trust you again, open the door.”
There was the sound behind him of a door opening.
“There were more things I planned to say to you,” Dumbledore said,
“and if you leave now, you will not know what they were.”
Sometimes Harry absolutely hated being a Ravenclaw.
He’s never hurt a student, said Harry’s Gryﬃndor side. Just keep re*

268 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

membering that and you’ll be sure not to panic. You’re not going to run
away just because things are getting interesting, are you?
You can’t just walk out on the Headmaster! said the Huﬄepuﬀ part.
What if he starts deducting House points? He could make your school life
very diﬃcult if he decides he doesn’t like you!
And a piece of himself which Harry didn’t much like but couldn’t
quite manage to silence was pondering the potential advantages of being one of the few friends of this mad old wizard who also happened
to be Headmaster, Chief Warlock, and Supreme Mugwump. And unfortunately his inner Slytherin seemed to be much better than Draco at
turning people to the Dark Side, because it was saying things like poor fellow, he looks like he needs someone to talk to, doesn’t he? and you wouldn’t
want such a powerful man to end up trusting someone less virtuous, would
you? and I wonder what sort of incredible secrets Dumbledore could tell you
if, you know, you became friends with him and even I bet he’s got a reaallly
interesting book collection.
You’re all a bunch of lunatics, Harry thought at the entire assemblage,
but he’d been unanimously outvoted by every component part of himself.
Harry turned, took a step toward the open door, reached out, and
deliberately closed it again. It was a costless sacriﬁce given that he was
staying anyway, Dumbledore could control his movements regardless,
but maybe it would impress Dumbledore.
When Harry turned back around he saw that the powerful insane
wizard was once more smiling and looking friendly. That was good,
maybe.
“Please don’t do that again,” Harry said. “I don’t like being trapped.”
“I am sorry about that, Harry,” said Dumbledore in what sounded
like tones of sincere apology. “But it would have been terribly unwise
to let you leave without your father’s rock.”
“Of course,” Harry said. “It wasn’t reasonable of me to expect the
door to open before I put the quest items in my inventory.”
Dumbledore smiled and nodded.
Harry went over to the desk, twisted his mokeskin pouch around
to the front of his belt, and, with some eﬀort, managed to heave up the
*

269 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

rock in his eleven-year-old arms and feed it in.
He could actually feel the weight slowly diminishing as the Widening
Lip charm ate the rock, and the burp which followed was rather noisy
and had a distinctly complaining sound to it.
His mother’s ﬁfth-year Potions textbook (which held a secret that
was in fact pretty terrible) followed shortly after.
And then Harry’s inner Slytherin made a sly suggestion for ingratiating himself with the Headmaster, which, unfortunately, had been
perfectly pitched in such a way as to gain the support of the majority
Ravenclaw faction.
“So,” Harry said. “Um. As long as I’m hanging around, I don’t suppose you would like to give me a bit of a tour of your oﬃce? I’m a bit
curious as to what some of these things are,” and that was his understatement for the month of September.
Dumbledore gazed at him, and then nodded with a slight grin. “I’m
ﬂattered by your interest,” said Dumbledore, “but I’m afraid there isn’t
much to say.” Dumbledore took a step closer to the wall and pointed to
a painting of a sleeping man. “These are portraits of past Headmasters
of Hogwarts.” He turned and pointed to his desk. “This is my desk.”
He pointed to his chair. “This is my chair—”
“Excuse me,” Harry said, “actually I was wondering about those.”
Harry pointed to a small cube that was softly whispering “blorple... blorple... blorple”.
“Oh, the little ﬁddly things?” said Dumbledore. “They came with
the Headmaster’s oﬃce and I have absolutely no idea what most of them
do. Although this dial with the eight hands counts the number of, let’s
call them sneezes, by left-handed witches within the borders of France,
you would not believe how much work it took to nail that down. And
this one with the golden wibblers is my own invention and Minerva is
never, ever going to ﬁgure out what it’s doing.”
Dumbledore took a step over to the hatrack while Harry was still
processing this. “Here of course we have the Sorting Hat, I believe the
two of you have met. It told me that it was never again to be placed on
your head under any circumstances. You’re only the fourteenth student
in history it’s said that about, Baba Yaga was another one and I’ll tell you
*

270 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

about the other twelve when you’re older. This is an umbrella. This
is another umbrella.” Dumbledore took another few steps and turned
around, now smiling quite broadly. “And of course, most people who
come to my oﬃce want to see Fawkes.”
Dumbledore was standing next to the bird on the golden platform.
Harry came over, rather puzzled. “This is Fawkes?”
“Fawkes is a phoenix,” said Dumbledore. “Very rare, very powerful
magical creatures.”
“Ah...” Harry said. He lowered his head and stared into the tiny,
beady black eyes, which showed not the slightest sign of power or intelligence.
“Ahhh...” Harry said again.
He was pretty sure he recognized the shape of the bird. It was pretty
hard to miss.
“Umm...”
Say something intelligent! Harry’s mind roared at itself. Don’t just
stand there sounding like a gibbering moron!
Well what the heck am I supposed to say? Harry’s mind ﬁred back.
Anything!
You mean, anything besides “Fawkes is a chicken”—
Yes! Anything but that!
“So, ah, what sort of magic do phoenixes do, then?”
“Their tears have the power to heal,” Dumbledore said. “They are
creatures of ﬁre, and move between all places as easily as ﬁre may extinguish itself in one place and be kindled in another. The tremendous
strain of their innate magic ages their bodies quickly, and yet they are
as close to undying as any creature that exists in this world, for whenever their bodies fail them they immolate themselves in a burst of ﬁre
and leave behind a hatchling, or sometimes an egg.” Dumbledore came
closer and inspected the chicken, frowning. “Hm... looking a little peaky
there, I’d say.”
By the time this statement registered fully in Harry’s mind, the
chicken was already on ﬁre.
The chicken’s beak opened, but it didn’t have time for so much as
a single caw before it began to wither and char. The blaze was brief,
*

271

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

intense, and entirely self-contained; there was no smell of burning.
And then the ﬁre died down only seconds after it had begun, leaving
behind a tiny, pathetic heap of ashes on the golden platform.
“Don’t look so horriﬁed, Harry!” said Dumbledore. “Fawkes hasn’t
been hurt.” Dumbledore’s hand dipped into a pocket, and then the
same hand sifted through the ashes and turned up a small yellowish egg.
“Look, here’s an egg!”
“Oh... wow... amazing...”
“But now we really should get on with things,” Dumbledore said.
Leaving the egg behind in the ashes of the chicken, he returned to his
throne and seated himself. “It’s almost time for dinner, after all, and we
wouldn’t want to have to use our Time-Turners.”
There was a violent power struggle going on in Harry’s government.
Slytherin and Huﬄepuﬀ had switched sides after seeing the Headmaster
of Hogwarts set ﬁre to a chicken.
“Yes, things,” said Harry’s lips. “And then dinner.”
You’re sounding like a gibbering moron again observed Harry’s Internal Critic.
“Well,” Dumbledore said. “I fear I have a confession to make, Harry.
A confession and an apology.”
“Apologies are good” that doesn’t even make sense! What am I talking
about?
The old wizard sighed deeply. “You may not still think so after understanding what I have to say. I’m afraid, Harry, that I’ve been manipulating you your entire life. It was I who consigned you to the care of
your wicked stepparents—”
“My stepparents aren’t wicked!” blurted Harry. “My parents, I
mean!”
“They aren’t?” Dumbledore said, looking surprised and disappointed. “Not even a little wicked? That doesn’t ﬁt the pattern...”
Harry’s inner Slytherin screamed at the top of its mental lungs, Shut
up you idiot he’ll take you away from them!
“No, no,” said Harry, lips frozen in a ghastly grimace, “I was just
trying to spare your feelings, they’re actually very wicked...”
“They are?” Dumbledore leaned forward, gazing at him intently.
*

272 *

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

“What do they do?”
Talk fast “they, ah, I have to do dishes and wash math problems and
they don’t let me read a lot of books and—”
“Ah, good, that’s good to hear,” said Dumbledore, leaning back
again. He smiled in a sad sort of way. “I apologize for that, then. Now
where was I? Ah, yes. I’m sorry to say, Harry, that I am responsible for
virtually everything bad that has ever happened to you. I know that this
will probably make you very angry.”
“Yes, I’m very angry!” said Harry. “Grrr!”
Harry’s Internal Critic promptly awarded him the All-Time Award
for the Worst Acting in the History of Ever.
“And I just wanted you to know,” Dumbledore said, “I wanted to
tell you as early as possible, in case something happens to one of us later,
that I am truly, truly sorry. For everything that has already happened,
and everything that will.”
Moisture glistened in the old wizard’s eyes.
“And I’m very angry!” said Harry. “So angry that I want to leave
right now unless you’ve got anything else to say!”
Just go before he sets you on ﬁre! shrieked Slytherin, Huﬄepuﬀ, and
Gryﬃndor.
“I understand,” said Dumbledore. “One last thing then, Harry.
You are not to attempt the forbidden door on the third-ﬂoor corridor. There’s no possible way you could get through all the traps, and I
wouldn’t want to hear that you’d been hurt trying. Why, I doubt that
you could so much as open the ﬁrst door, since it’s locked and you don’t
know the spell Alohomora—”
Harry spun around and bolted for the exit at top speed, the doorknob
turned agreeably in his hand and then he was racing down the spiral stairs
even as they turned, his feet almost stumbling over themselves, in just a
moment he was at the bottom and the gargoyle was walking aside and
Harry ﬁred out of the stairwell like a cannonball.

**
*
*

273 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENTEEN

*
*

*

Harry Potter.
There must have been something about Harry Potter.
It was Thursday for everyone, after all, and yet this sort of thing
didn’t seem to happen to anyone else.
It was 6:21pm on Thursday afternoon when Harry Potter, ﬁring out
of the stairwell like a cannonball and accelerating at top speed, ran directly into Minerva McGonagall as she was turning a corner on her way
to the Headmaster’s oﬃce.
Thankfully neither of them were much hurt. As had been explained
to Harry a little earlier in the day—back when he was refusing to go anywhere near a broomstick again—Quidditch needed solid iron Bludgers
just to stand a decent chance of injuring the players, since wizards tended
to be a lot more resistant than Muggles to physical damage.
Harry and Professor McGonagall did both end up on the ﬂoor, and
the parchments she had been carrying went all over the corridor.
There was a terrible, terrible pause.
“Harry Potter,” breathed Professor McGonagall from where she was
lying on the ﬂoor right next to Harry. Her voice rose to nearly a shriek.
“What were you doing in the Headmaster’s oﬃce?”
“Nothing!” squeaked Harry.
“Were you talking about Professor Quirrell?”
“No! Dumbledore called me up there and he gave me this big rock
and said it was my father’s and I should carry it everywhere!”
There was another terrible pause.
“I see,” said Professor McGonagall, her voice a little calmer. She
stood up, brushed herself oﬀ, and glared at the scattered parchments,
which jumped into a neat stack and scurried back against the corridor
wall as though to hide from her gaze. “My sympathies, Mr. Potter, and
I apologize for doubting you.”
“Professor McGonagall,” Harry said. His voice was wavering. He
pushed himself oﬀ the ﬂoor, stood, and looked up at her trustworthy,
sane face. “Professor McGonagall...”
“Yes, Mr. Potter?”
“Do you think I should?” Harry said in a small voice. “Carry my
father’s rock everywhere?”
*

274

*

**
*

LOCATING THE H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

Professor McGonagall sighed. “That is between you and the Headmaster, I’m afraid.” She hesitated. “I will say that ignoring the Headmaster completely is almost never wise. I am sorry to hear of your dilemma,
Mr. Potter, and if there’s any way I can help you with whatever you decide to do—”
“Um,” Harry said. “Actually I was thinking that once I know how,
I could Transﬁgure the rock into a ring and wear it on my ﬁnger. If you
could teach me how to sustain a Transﬁguration—”
“It is good that you asked me ﬁrst,” Professor McGonagall said, her
face growing a bit stern. “If you lost control of the Transﬁguration the
reversal would cut oﬀ your ﬁnger and probably rip your hand in half.
And at your age, even a ring is too large a target for you to sustain indeﬁnitely without it being a serious drain on your magic. But I can have
a ring forged for you with a setting for a jewel, a small jewel, in contact with your skin, and you can practice sustaining a safe subject, like
a marshmallow. When you have kept it up successfully, even in your
sleep, for a full month, I will allow you to Transﬁgure, ah, your father’s
rock...” Professor McGonagall’s voice trailed oﬀ. “Did the Headmaster
really—”
“Yes. Ah... um...”
Professor McGonagall sighed. “That’s a bit strange even for him.”
She stooped and picked up the stack of parchments. “I’m sorry about
this, Mr. Potter. I apologize again for mistrusting you. But now it’s my
own turn to see the Headmaster.”
“Ah... good luck, I guess. Er...”
“Thank you, Mr. Potter.”
“Um...”
Professor McGonagall walked over to the gargoyle, inaudibly spoke
the password, and stepped through into the revolving spiral stairs. She
began to rise out of sight, and the gargoyle started back—
“Professor McGonagall the Headmaster set ﬁre to a chicken!”
“He wha—”

*

275 *

CHAPTER

EIGHTEEN

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES
“That does sound like the sort of thing I would do, doesn’t it?”

**
*
t was breakfast time on Friday morning. Harry took another huge
bite out of his toast and then tried to remind his brain that scarﬁng
his breakfast wouldn’t actually get him into the dungeons any faster.
Anyway they had a full hour of study time between breakfast and the
start of Potions.
But dungeons! In Hogwarts! Harry’s imagination was already
sketching the chasms, narrow bridges, torchlit sconces, and patches of
glowing moss. Would there be rats? Would there be dragons?
“Harry Potter,” said a quiet voice from behind him.
Harry looked over his shoulder and found himself beholding Ernie
Macmillan, smartly dressed in yellow-trimmed robes and looking a little
worried.
“Neville thought I should warn you,” Ernie said in a low voice. “I
think he’s right. Be careful of the Potions Master in our session today.
The older Huﬄepuﬀs told us that Professor Snape can be really nasty
to people he doesn’t like, and he doesn’t like most people who aren’t
Slytherins. If you say anything smart to him it... it could be really bad
for you, from what I’ve heard. Just keep your head down and don’t give
him any reason to notice you.”

I

*

277 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

There was a pause as Harry processed this, and then he lifted his eyebrows. (Harry wished he could raise just one eyebrow, like Spock, but
he’d never been able to manage.) “Thanks,” Harry said. “You might’ve
just saved me a lot of trouble.”
Ernie nodded, and turned to go back to the Huﬄepuﬀ table.
Harry resumed eating his toast.
It was around four bites afterward that someone said “Pardon me,”
and Harry turned around to see an older Ravenclaw, looking a little
worried—
Some time later, Harry was ﬁnishing up his third plate of rashers.
(He’d learned to eat heavily at breakfast. He could always eat lightly at
lunch if he didn’t end up using the Time-Turner.) And there was yet
another voice from behind him saying “Harry?”
“Yes,” Harry said wearily, “I’ll try not to draw Professor Snape’s
attention—”
“Oh, that’s hopeless,” said Fred.
“Completely hopeless,” said George.
“So we had the house elves bake you a cake,” said Fred.
“We’re going to put one candle on it for every point you lose for
Ravenclaw,” said George.
“And have a party for you at the Gryﬃndor table during lunch,” said
Fred.
“We hope that’ll cheer you up afterward,” ﬁnished George.
Harry swallowed his last bite of rasher and turned around. “All
right,” said Harry. “I wasn’t going to ask this after Professor Binns, I
really wasn’t, but if Professor Snape is that awful why hasn’t he been
ﬁred?”
“Fired?” said Fred.
“You mean, let go?” said George.
“Yes,” Harry said. “It’s what you do to bad teachers. You ﬁre them.
Then you hire a better teacher instead. You don’t have unions or tenure
here, right?”
Fred and George were frowning in much the same way that huntergatherer tribal elders might frown if you tried to tell them about calculus.
“I don’t know,” said Fred after a while. “I never thought about that.”
*

278 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

“Me neither,” said George.
“Yeah,” said Harry, “I get that a lot. See you at lunch, guys, and don’t
blame me if there aren’t any candles on that cake.”
Fred and George both laughed, as if Harry had said something funny,
and bowed to him and headed back toward Gryﬃndor.
Harry turned back to the breakfast table and grabbed a cupcake. His
stomach already felt full, but he had a feeling this morning might use a
lot of calories.
As he ate his cupcake, Harry thought of the worst teacher he’d met
so far, Professor Binns of History. Professor Binns was a ghost. From
what Hermione had said about ghosts, it didn’t seem likely that they
were fully self-aware. There were no famous discoveries made by ghosts,
or much of any original work, no matter who they’d been in life. Ghosts
tended to have trouble remembering the current century. Hermione had
said they were like accidental portraits, impressed into the surrounding
matter by a burst of psychic energy accompanying a wizard’s sudden
death.
Harry had run into some stupid teachers during his abortive forays
into standard Muggle education—his father had been a lot pickier when
it came to selecting grad students as tutors, of course—but History class
was the ﬁrst time he’d encountered a teacher who literally wasn’t sentient.
And it showed, too. Harry had given up after ﬁve minutes and
started reading a textbook. When it became clear that “Professor Binns”
wasn’t going to object, Harry had also reached into his pouch and gotten
earplugs.
Did ghosts not require a salary? Was that it? Or was it literally
impossible to ﬁre anyone in Hogwarts even if they died?
Now it seemed that Professor Snape was going about being absolutely awful to everyone who wasn’t a Slytherin and it hadn’t even occurred to anyone to terminate his contract.
And the Headmaster had set ﬁre to a chicken.
“Excuse me,” came a worried voice from behind him.
“I swear,” Harry said without turning around, “this place is almost
eight and a half percent as bad as what Dad says about Oxford.”
*

279 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

**
*
Harry stamped down the stone corridors, looking aﬀronted, annoyed,
and infuriated all at once.
“Dungeons!” Harry hissed. “Dungeons! These are not dungeons!
This is a basement! A basement!”
Some of the Ravenclaw girls gave him odd looks. The boys were all
used to him by now.
It seemed that the level in which the Potions classroom was located
was called the “dungeons” for no better reason than that it was below
ground and slightly colder than the main castle.
In Hogwarts! In Hogwarts! Harry had been waiting his whole life and
now he was still waiting and if there was anywhere on the face of the Earth
that had decent dungeons it ought to be Hogwarts! Was Harry going to
have to build his own castle if he wanted to see one little bottomless
abyss?
A short time later they got to the actual Potions classroom and Harry
cheered up considerably.
The Potions classroom had strange preserved creatures ﬂoating in
huge jars on shelves that covered every centimeter of wall space between the closets. Harry had gotten far enough along in his reading now
that he could actually identify some of the creatures, like the Zabriskan
Fontema. Albeit the ﬁfty-centimeter spider looked like an Acromantula
but it was too small to be one. He’d tried asking Hermione, but she
hadn’t seemed very interested in looking anywhere near where he was
pointing.
Harry was looking at a large dust ball with eyes and feet when the
assassin swept into the room.
That was the ﬁrst thought that crossed Harry’s mind when he saw
Professor Severus Snape. There was something quiet and deadly about
the way the man stalked between the children’s desks. His robes were
unkempt, his hair spotted and greasy. There was something about him
that seemed reminiscent of Lucius, although the two of them looked
*

280 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

nothing remotely alike, and you got the impression that where Lucius
would kill you with ﬂawless elegance, this man would simply kill you.
“Sit down,” said Professor Severus Snape. “Now.”
Harry and a few other children who had been standing around talking to each other scrambled for desks. Harry had planned on ending up
next to Hermione but somehow he found himself sitting down in the
nearest empty desk next to Justin Finch-Fletchley (it was a Doubles session, Ravenclaw and Huﬄepuﬀ) which put him two desks to the left of
Hermione.
Severus seated himself behind the teacher’s desk, and without the
slightest transition or introduction, said, “Hannah Abbott.”
“Here,” said Hannah in a somewhat trembling voice.
“Susan Bones.”
“Present.”
And so it went, no one daring to say a word in edgewise, until:
“Ah, yes. Harry Potter. Our new... celebrity.”
“The celebrity is present, sir.”
Half the class ﬂinched, and some of the smarter ones suddenly looked
like they wanted to run out the door while the classroom was still there.
Severus smiled in an anticipatory sort of way and called the next
name on his list.
Harry gave a mental sigh. That had happened way too fast for him
to do anything about it. Oh well. Clearly this man already didn’t like
him, for whatever reason. And when Harry thought about it, better
by far that this Potions professor should pick on him rather than, say,
Neville or Hermione. Harry was a lot better able to defend himself.
Yep, probably all for the best.
When full attendance had been taken, Severus swept his gaze over
the full class. His eyes were as empty as a night sky without stars.
“You are here,” Severus said in a quiet voice which the students at
back strained to hear, “to learn the subtle science and exact art of potionmaking. As there is little foolish wand-waving here, many of you
will hardly believe this is magic. I don’t expect you will really understand the beauty of the softly simmering cauldron with its shimmering
fumes, the delicate power of liquids that creep through human veins,”
*

281

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

this in a rather caressing, gloating tone, “bewitching the mind, ensnaring the senses,” this was just getting creepier and creepier. “I can teach
you how to bottle fame, brew glory, even stopper death—if you aren’t
as great a pack of fools as I usually have to teach.”
Severus somehow seemed to notice the look of skepticism on Harry’s
face, or at least his eyes suddenly jumped to where Harry was sitting.
“Potter!” snapped the Potions professor. “What would I get if I added
powdered root of asphodel to an infusion of wormwood?”
Harry blinked. “Was that in Magical Drafts and Potions?” he said.
“I just ﬁnished reading it, and I don’t remember anything which used
wormwood—”
Hermione’s hand went up and Harry shot her a glare which caused
her to raise her hand even higher.
“Tut, tut,” Severus said silkily. “Fame clearly isn’t everything.”
“Really?” Harry said. “But you just told us you’d teach us how to
bottle fame. Say, how does that work, exactly? You drink it and turn
into a celebrity?”
Three-quarters of the class ﬂinched.
Hermione’s hand was dropping slowly back down. Well, that wasn’t
surprising. She might be his rival, but she wasn’t the sort of girl who
would play along after it became clear that the professor was deliberately
trying to humiliate him.
Harry was trying hard to keep control of his temper. The ﬁrst rejoinder that had crossed his mind was ‘Abracadabra’.
“Let’s try again,” said Severus. “Potter, where would you look if I
told you to ﬁnd me a bezoar?”
“That’s not in the textbook either,” Harry said, “but in one Muggle
book I read that a trichinobezoar is a mass of solidiﬁed hair found in a human stomach, and Muggles used to believe it would cure any poison—”
“Wrong,” Severus said. “A bezoar is found in the stomach of a goat,
it is not made of hair, and it will cure most poisons but not all.”
“I didn’t say it would, I said that was what I read in one Muggle
book—”
“No one here is interested in your pathetic Muggle books. Final try.
What is the diﬀerence, Potter, between monksblood and wolfsbane?”
*

282 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

That did it.
“You know,” Harry said icily, “in one of my quite fascinating Muggle
books, they describe a study in which people managed to make themselves look very smart by asking questions about random facts that only
they knew. Apparently the onlookers only noticed that the askers knew
and the answerers didn’t, and failed to adjust for the unfairness of the underlying game. So, Professor, can you tell me how many electrons are
in the outermost orbital of a carbon atom?”
Severus’s smile widened. “Four,” he said. “It is a useless fact which no
one should bother writing down, however. And for your information,
Potter, asphodel and wormwood make a sleeping potion so powerful it
is known as the Draught of Living Death. As for monkshood and wolfsbane, they are the same plant, which also goes by the name of aconite, as
you would know if you had read One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi.
Thought you didn’t need to open the book before coming, eh, Potter?
All the rest of you should be copying that down so that you will not be
as ignorant as him.” Severus paused, looking quite pleased with himself.
“And that will be... ﬁve points? No, let us make it an even ten points
from Ravenclaw for backchat.”
Hermione gasped, along with a number of others.
“Professor Severus Snape,” Harry bit out. “I know of nothing which
I have done to earn your enmity. If there is some problem you have with
me which I do not know about, I suggest we—”
“Shut up, Potter. Ten more points from Ravenclaw. The rest of you,
open your books to page 3.”
There was only a slight, only a very faint burning sensation in the
back of Harry’s throat, and no moisture at all in his eyes. If crying was
not an eﬀective strategy for destroying this Potions professor then there
was no point in crying.
Slowly, Harry sat up very straight. All his blood seemed to have
been drained away and replaced with liquid nitrogen. He knew he’d
been trying to keep his temper but he couldn’t seem to remember why.
“Harry,” whispered Hermione frantically from two desks over,
“stop, please, it’s all right, we won’t count it—”
“Talking in class, Granger? Three—”
*

283 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

“So,” said a voice colder than zero Kelvin, “how does one go about
ﬁling a formal complaint against an abusive professor? Does one talk
to the Deputy Headmistress, write a letter to the Board of Governors...
would you care to explain how it works?”
The class was utterly frozen.
“Detention for one month, Potter,” Severus said, smiling even more
broadly.
“I decline to recognize your authority as a teacher and I will not serve
any detention you give.”
People stopped breathing.
Severus’s smile vanished. “Then you will be—” his voice stopped
short.
“Expelled, were you about to say?” Harry, on the other hand, was
now smiling thinly. “But then you seemed to doubt your ability to carry
out the threat, or fear the consequences if you did. I, on the other hand,
neither doubt nor fear the prospect of ﬁnding a school with less abusive
professors. Or perhaps I should hire private tutors, as is my accustomed
practice, and be taught at my full learning speed. I have enough money
in my vault. Something about bounties on a Dark Lord I defeated. But
there are teachers at Hogwarts who I rather like, so I think it will be
easier if I ﬁnd some way to get rid of you instead.”
“Get rid of me?” Severus said, now also smiling thinly. “What an
amusing conceit. How do you suppose you will do that, Potter?”
“I understand there have been a number of complaints about you
from students and their parents,” a guess but a safe one, “which leaves
only the question of why you’re not already gone. Is Hogwarts too
ﬁnancially strapped to aﬀord a real Potions professor? I could chip in,
if so. I’m sure they could ﬁnd a better class of teacher if they oﬀered
double your current salary.”
Two poles of ice radiated freezing winter across the classroom.
“You will ﬁnd,” Severus said softly, “that the Board of Governers is
not the slightest bit sympathetic to your oﬀer.”
“Lucius...” Harry said. “That’s why you’re still here. Perhaps I should
chat with Lucius about that. I believe he desires to meet with me. I
wonder if I have anything he wants?”
*

284 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

Hermione frantically shook her head. Harry noticed out of the corner of his eye, but his attention was all on Severus.
“You are a very foolish boy,” Severus said. He wasn’t smiling at all,
now. “You have nothing that Lucius values more than my friendship.
And if you did, I have other allies.” His voice grew hard. “And I ﬁnd
it increasingly unlikely that you were not Sorted into Slytherin. How
was it that you managed to stay out of my House? Ah, yes, because the
Sorting Hat claimed it was joking. For the ﬁrst time in recorded history.
What were you really chatting about with the Sorting Hat, Potter? Did
you have something that it wanted?”
Harry stared into Severus’s cold gaze and remembered that the Sorting Hat had warned him not to meet anyone’s eyes while thinking
about—Harry dropped his gaze to Severus’s desk.
“You seem oddly reluctant to look me in the eyes, Potter!”
A shock of sudden understanding—“So it was you the Sorting Hat
was warning me about!”
“What?” said Severus’s voice, sounding genuinely surprised, though
of course Harry didn’t look at his face.
Harry got up out of his desk.
“Sit down, Potter,” said an angry voice from somewhere he wasn’t
looking.
Harry ignored it, and looked around the classroom. “I have no intention of letting one unprofessional teacher ruin my time at Hogwarts,”
Harry said with deadly calm. “I think I’ll take my leave of this class, and
either hire a tutor to teach me Potions while I’m here, or if the Board is
really that locked up, learn over the summer. If any of you decide that
you don’t care to be bullied by this man, my sessions will be open to
you.”
“Sit down, Potter!”
Harry strode across the room and grasped the doorknob.
It didn’t turn.
Harry slowly turned around, and caught a glimpse of Severus smiling
nastily before he remembered to look away.
“Open this door.”
“No,” said Severus.
*

285 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

“You are making me feel threatened,” said a voice so icy it didn’t
sound like Harry’s at all, “and that is a mistake.”
Severus’s voice laughed. “What do you intend to do about it, little
boy?”
Harry took six long strides forward away from the door, until he
was standing near the back row of desks.
Then Harry drew himself upright and raised his right hand in one
terrible motion, ﬁngers poised to snap.
Neville screamed and dived under his desk. Other children shrank
back or instinctively raised their arms to shield themselves.
“Harry don’t!” shrieked Hermione. “Whatever you were going to do
to him, don’t do it!”
“Have you all gone mad?” barked Severus’s voice.
Slowly, Harry lowered his hand. “I wasn’t going to hurt him, Hermione,” Harry said, his voice a little lower. “I was just going to blow up
the door.”
Though now that Harry remembered it, you weren’t supposed to
Transﬁgure things that were to be burned, which meant that going back
in time afterward and getting Fred or George to Transﬁgure some carefully measured amount of explosives might not actually have been such
a good idea...
“Silencio,” said Severus’s voice.
Harry tried to say “What?” and found that no sound was coming
out.
“This has become ridiculous. I think you’ve been allowed to get
yourself in enough trouble for one day, Potter. You are the most disruptive and unruly student I have ever seen, and I don’t recall how many
points Ravenclaw has right now, but I’m sure I can manage to wipe them
all out. Ten points from Ravenclaw. Ten points from Ravenclaw. Ten
points from Ravenclaw! Fifty points from Ravenclaw! Now sit down
and watch the rest of the class take their lesson!”
Harry put his hand into his pouch and tried to say ‘marker’ but of
course no words came out. For one brief moment that stopped him;
and then it occurred to Harry to spell out M-A-R-K-E-R using ﬁnger
motions, which worked. P-A-D and he had a pad of paper. Harry strode
*

286 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

over to an empty desk, not the one he’d originally sat down in, and
scrawled a brief message. He tore oﬀ that sheet of paper, put away the
marker and pad in a pocket of his robes for quicker access, and held up
his message, not to Snape, but to the rest of the class.
I’m leaving
does anyone else
need to get out?
“You’re insane, Potter,” Severus said with cold contempt.
Aside from that, no one spoke.
Harry swept an ironic bow to the teacher’s desk, walked over to the
wall, and with one smooth motion yanked open a closet door, stepped
in, and slammed the door shut behind him.
There was the muﬄed sound of someone snapping his ﬁngers, and
then nothing.
In the classroom, students looked at each other in puzzlement and
fear.
The Potions Master’s face was now completely enraged. He crossed
the room in terrible strides and yanked open the closet door.
The closet was empty.

**
*
One hour earlier, Harry listened from inside the closed closet. There
was no sound from outside, and no point in taking risks either.
C-L-O-A-K, his ﬁngers spelled out.
Once he was invisible, he very carefully and slowly cracked open the
closet door and peeked out. No one seemed to be in the classroom.
The door wasn’t locked.
It was when Harry was outside the dangerous place and inside the
hallway, safely invisible, that some of the anger drained away and he
realized what he’d just done.
What he’d just done.
Harry’s invisible face was frozen in absolute horror.
*

287 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

He’d antagonized a teacher three orders of magnitude beyond anything he’d ever managed before. He’d threatened to walk out of Hogwarts and might have to follow through on it. He’d lost all the points
Ravenclaw had and then he’d used the Time-Turner...
His imagination showed him his parents yelling at him after he was
expelled, Professor McGonagall disappointed in him, and it was just too
painful and he couldn’t bear it and he couldn’t think of any way to save
himself—
The thought that Harry allowed himself to think was that if getting
angry had gotten him into all this trouble, then maybe when he was
angry he’d think of a way out, things seemed clearer somehow when he
was angry.
And the thought that Harry didn’t let himself think was that he just
couldn’t face this future if he wasn’t angry.
So he cast his thoughts back and remembered the burning humiliation—
Tut, tut. Fame clearly isn’t everything.
Ten points from Ravenclaw for backchat.
The calming cold washed back through his veins like a wave reﬂected
and returning from some breaker, and Harry let out his breath.
Okay. Back to being sane now.
He was actually feeling a bit disappointed in his non-angry self for
collapsing like that and wanting only to get out of trouble. Professor
Severus Snape was everyone’s problem. Normal-Harry had forgotten
that and wished for a way to protect himself. And let all the other victims
go hang? The question wasn’t how to protect himself, the question was
how to destroy this Potions professor.
So this is my dark side, is it? Bit of a prejudiced term that, my light side
seems more selﬁsh and cowardly, not to mention confused and panicky.
And now that he was thinking clearly, it was equally clear what to
do next. He’d already given himself an extra hour to prepare, and could
get up to ﬁve hours more if required...

**
*
*

288 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

Minerva McGonagall waited in the Headmaster’s oﬃce.
Dumbledore sat in his padded throne behind his desk, dressed in
four layers of formal lavender robes. Minerva sat in a chair before him,
opposite Severus in another chair. Facing the three of them was an empty
wooden stool.
They were waiting for Harry Potter.
Harry, Minerva thought despairingly, you promised you wouldn’t bite
any teachers!
And in her mind she could see very clearly the reply, Harry’s angry
face and his outraged response: I said I wouldn’t bite anyone who didn’t
bite me ﬁrst!
There was a knock at the door.
“Come in!” Dumbledore called.
The door swept open, and Harry Potter entered. Minerva almost
gasped out loud. The boy looked cool, collected, and utterly in control
of himself.
“Good mor—” Harry’s voice suddenly cut oﬀ. His jaw dropped.
Minerva tracked Harry’s gaze, and she saw that Harry was staring
at Fawkes where the phoenix sat on its golden perch. Fawkes ﬂuttered
his bright red-golden wings like the ﬂickering of a ﬂame, and dipped his
head in a measured nod to the boy.
Harry turned to stare at Dumbledore.
Dumbledore winked at him.
Minerva felt she was missing something.
Sudden uncertainty crossed Harry’s face. His coolness wavered. Fear
showed in his eyes, then anger, and then the boy was calm again.
A chill went down Minerva’s spine. Something was not right here.
“Please sit down,” said Dumbledore. His face was now serious once
more.
Harry sat.
“So, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “I’ve heard one report of this day
from Professor Snape. Would you care to tell me what happened in
your own words?”
Harry’s gaze ﬂicked dismissively to Severus. “It’s not complicated,”
said the boy, smiling thinly. “He tried bullying me the way he’s been
*

289 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

bullying every non-Slytherin in the school since the day Lucius foisted
him oﬀ on you. As for the other details, I request a private conversation
with you concerning them. A student who is reporting abusive behavior
from a professor can hardly be expected to speak frankly in front of that
same professor, after all.”
This time Minerva couldn’t stop herself from gasping out loud.
Severus simply laughed.
And the Headmaster’s face grew grave. “Mr. Potter,” the Headmaster said, “one does not speak of a Hogwarts professor in such terms. I
fear that you labor under a terrible misapprehension. Professor Severus
Snape has my fullest conﬁdence, and serves Hogwarts at my own behest,
not Lucius Malfoy’s.”
There was silence for a few moments.
When the boy spoke again his voice was icy. “Am I missing something here?”
“Quite a number of things, Mr. Potter,” said the Headmaster. “You
should understand, to start with, that the purpose of this meeting is to
discuss how to discipline you for the events of this morning.”
“This man has terrorized your school for years. I spoke to students
and collected stories to make sure there would be enough for a newspaper
campaign to rally the parents against him. Some of the younger students
cried while they told me. I almost cried when I heard them! You allowed
this abuser to run free? You did this to your students? Why?”
Minerva swallowed a lump in her throat. She’d—thought that, sometimes, but somehow she’d never quite—
“Mr. Potter,” said the Headmaster, his voice now stern, “this meeting
is not about Professor Snape. It is about you and your disregard for
school discipline. Professor Snape has suggested, and I have agreed, that
three full months of detention will be appropriate—”
“Declined,” Harry said icily.
Minerva was speechless.
“This is not a request, Mr. Potter,” the Headmaster said. The full,
entire force of the wizard’s gaze was turned on the boy. “This is your
punishme—”
“You will explain to me why you allowed this man to hurt the chil*

290 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

dren placed in your care, and if your explanation is not suﬃcient then I
will begin my newspaper campaign with you as the target.”
Minerva’s body swayed with the force of that blow, with the sheer
raw lèse majesté.
Even Severus looked shocked.
“That, Harry, would be most extremely unwise,” Dumbledore said
slowly. “I am the primary piece opposing Lucius on the gameboard. For
you to do such a thing would strengthen him greatly, and I did not think
that was your chosen side.”
The boy was still for a long moment.
“This conversation grows private,” Harry said. His hand ﬂicked in
Severus’s direction. “Send him away.”
Dumbledore shook his head. “Harry, did I not tell you that Severus
Snape has my fullest conﬁdence?”
The boy’s face showed the shock of it. “This man’s bullying makes
you vulnerable! I am not the only one who could start a newspaper
campaign against you! This is insane! Why are you doing this?”
Dumbledore sighed. “I’m sorry, Harry. It has to do with things that
you are not, at this time, ready to hear.”
The boy stared at Dumbledore. Then he turned to look at Severus.
Then back to Dumbledore again.
“It is insanity,” the boy said slowly. “You haven’t reined him in because you think he’s part of the pattern. That Hogwarts needs an evil
Potions Master to be a proper magical school, just as it needs a ghost to
teach History.”
“That does sound like the sort of thing I would do, doesn’t it?” said
Dumbledore, smiling.
“Unacceptable,” Harry said ﬂatly. His gaze was now cold and dark.
“I will not tolerate bullying or abuse. I had considered many possible
ways of dealing with this problem, but I will make it simple. Either this
man goes, or I do.”
Minerva gasped again. Something strange ﬂickered in Severus’s eyes.
Now Dumbledore’s gaze was also growing cold. “Expulsion, Mister
Potter, is the ﬁnal threat which may be used against a student. It is not
customarily used as a threat by students against the Headmaster. This is
*

291

*

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

the best magical school in the entire world, and an education here is not
an opportunity given to everyone. Are you under the impression that
Hogwarts cannot get along without you?”
And Harry sat there, smiling thinly.
Sudden horror dawned on Minerva. Surely Harry wouldn’t—
“You forget,” Harry said, “that you’re not the only one who can see
patterns. This grows private. Now send him—” Harry ﬂicked a hand at
Severus again, and then stopped in mid-sentence and mid-gesture.
Minerva could see it on Harry’s face, the moment when he remembered.
She’d told him, after all.
“Mr. Potter,” said the Headmaster, “once again, Severus Snape has
my fullest conﬁdence.”
“You told him,” whispered the boy. “You utter fool.”
Dumbledore didn’t react to the insult. “Told him what?”
“That the Dark Lord is alive.”
“What in Merlin’s name are you on about, Potter?” cried Severus in
tones of sheer astonishment and outrage.
Harry glanced brieﬂy at him, smiling grimly. “Oh, so we are a
Slytherin, then,” Harry said. “I was starting to wonder.”
And then there was silence.
Finally Dumbledore spoke. His voice was mild. “Harry, what are
you talking about?”
“I’m sorry, Albus,” Minerva whispered.
Severus and Dumbledore turned to look at her.
“Professor McGonagall didn’t tell me,” said Harry’s voice, swiftly
and less calm than it had been. “I guessed. I told you, I can see the
patterns too. I guessed, and she controlled her reaction just as Severus
did. But her control fell a shade short of perfection, and I could tell it
was control, not genuine.”
“And I told him,” said Minerva, her voice trembling a little, “that
you, and I, and Severus were the only ones who knew.”
“Which she did as a concession to prevent me from simply going
around asking questions, as I threatened to do if she didn’t talk,” Harry
said. The boy chuckled brieﬂy. “I really should have gotten one of you
*

292 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

alone and told you that she told me everything, to see if you let anything
slip. Probably wouldn’t have worked, but would have been worth a
shot.” The boy smiled again. “Threat’s still on the table and I do expect
to be briefed fully at some point.”
Severus was giving her a look of utter contempt. Minerva raised her
chin and bore it. She knew it was deserved.
Dumbledore leaned back in his padded throne. His eyes were as cold
as anything Minerva had seen from him since the day his brother died.
“And you threaten to abandon us to Voldemort if we do not comply
with your wishes.”
Harry’s voice was razor-sharp. “I regret to inform you that you are
not the center of the universe. I’m not threatening to walk out on magical Britain. I’m threatening to walk out on you. I am not a meek little
Frodo. This is my quest and if you want in you will play by my rules.”
Dumbledore’s face was still cold. “I am beginning to doubt your
suitability as the hero, Mr. Potter.”
Harry’s return gaze was equally icy. “I am beginning to doubt your
suitability as my Gandalf, Mr. Dumbledore. Boromir was at least a plausible mistake. What is this Nazgul doing in my Fellowship?”
Minerva was completely lost. She looked at Severus, to see if he was
following this, and she saw that Severus had turned his face away from
Harry’s ﬁeld of vision and was smiling.
“I suppose,” Dumbledore said slowly, “that from your perspective it
is a reasonable question. So, Mr. Potter, if Professor Snape is to leave
you alone henceforth, will that be the last time this issue arises, or will
I ﬁnd you here every week with a new demand?”
“Leave me alone?” Harry’s voice was outraged. “I am not his only
victim and certainly not the most vulnerable! Have you forgotten how defenseless children are? How much they hurt? Henceforth Severus will treat
every student of Hogwarts with appropriate and professional courtesy,
or you will ﬁnd another Potions Master, or you will ﬁnd another hero!”
Dumbledore started laughing—a full-throated, warm, humorous
laughter, as if Harry had just performed a comic dance in front of him.
Minerva didn’t dare move. Her eyes ﬂickered and she saw that
Severus was equally motionless.
*

293 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

Harry’s visage grew even colder. “You mistake me, Headmaster, if
you think that this is a joke. This is not a request. This is your punishment.”
“Mr. Potter—” Minerva said. She didn’t even know what she was
going to say. She simply couldn’t let that go by.
Harry made a shushing gesture at her and continued to speak to
Dumbledore. “And if that seems impolite to you,” Harry said, his voice
now a little less hard, “it seemed no less impolite when you said it to me.
You would not say such a thing to anyone who you considered a real
human being instead of a subordinate child, and I will treat you with
just the same courtesy as you treat me—”
“Oh, indeed, in very deed, this is my punishment if ever there was
one! Of course you’re in here blackmailing me to save your fellow students, not to save yourself! I can’t imagine why I would have thought
otherwise!” Dumbledore was now laughing even harder. He pounded
his ﬁst on the desk three times.
Harry’s gaze grew uncertain. His face turned toward her, addressing
her for the ﬁrst time. “Excuse me,” Harry said. His voice seemed to be
wavering. “Does he need to take his medication or something?”
“Ah...” Minerva had no idea what she could possibly say.
“Well,” said Dumbledore. He wiped away tears that had formed in
his eyes. “Pardon me. I’m sorry for the interruption. Please continue
with the blackmail.”
Harry opened his mouth, then closed it again. He now seemed a
little unsteady. “Ah... he’s also to stop reading students’ minds.”
“Minerva,” Severus said, his voice deadly, “you—”
“Sorting Hat warned me,” said Harry.
“What?”
“Can’t say anything else. Anyway I think that’s it. I’m done.”
Silence.
“Now what?” Minerva said, when it became apparent that no one
else was going to say anything.
“Now what?” Dumbledore echoed. “Why, now the hero wins, of
course.”
“What?” said Severus, Minerva, and Harry.
*

294 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

“Well, he certainly seems to have backed us into a corner,” Dumbledore said, smiling happily. “But Hogwarts does need an evil Potions
Master, or it just wouldn’t be a proper magical school, now would it?
So how about if Professor Snape is only awful toward students in their
ﬁfth year and higher?”
“What?” said all three of them again.
“If it’s the most vulnerable victims about whom you’re concerned.
Maybe you’re right, Harry. Maybe I have forgotten over the decades
what it’s like to be a child. So let’s compromise. Severus will continue
to unfairly award points to Slytherin and impose lax discipline on his
House, and he will be awful to non-Slytherin students in their ﬁfth year
and higher. To others he will be scary, but not abusive. He will promise
to only read minds when the safety of a student requires it. Hogwarts
will have its evil Potions Master, and the most vulnerable victims, as you
put it, will be safe.”
Minerva McGonagall was as shocked as she’d ever been in her life.
She glanced uncertainly at Severus, whose face had been left completely
neutral, as though he couldn’t decide what sort of expression he ought
to be wearing.
“I suppose that is acceptable,” Harry said. His voice sounded a bit
odd.
“You can’t be serious,” Severus said, his voice as expressionless as his
face.
“I am very much in favor of this,” Minerva said slowly. She was so
much in favor that her heart was pounding wildly beneath her robes.
“But what could we possibly tell the students? They might not have
questioned this while Severus was... being awful to everyone, but—”
“Harry can tell the other students that he discovered a terrible secret
of Severus’s and did a bit of blackmail,” said Dumbledore. “It’s true,
after all; he discovered that Severus was reading minds, and he certainly
did blackmail us.”
“This is insanity!” exploded Severus.
“Bwah ha ha!” said Dumbledore.
“Ah...” said Harry uncertainly. “And if anyone asks me why ﬁfth
years and above got shafted? I wouldn’t blame them for being irate, and
*

295 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

that part wasn’t exactly my idea—”
“Tell them,” said Dumbledore, “that it wasn’t you who suggested
the compromise, that it was all you could get. And then refuse to say
anything more. That, too, is true. There’s an art to it, you’ll pick it up
with practice.”
Harry nodded slowly. “And the points he took from Ravenclaw?”
“They must not be given back.”
It was Minerva who said it.
Harry looked at her.
“I’m sorry, Mr. Potter,” she said. She was sorry, but it had to be done.
“There must be some consequences for your misbehavior or this school
will fall to pieces.”
Harry shrugged. “Acceptable,” he said ﬂatly. “But in the future
Severus will not strike at my House connections by taking points from
me, nor will he waste my valuable time with detentions. Should he feel
that my behavior requires correction, he may communicate his concerns
to Professor McGonagall.”
“Harry,” Minerva said, “will you continue to submit to school discipline, or are you to be above the law now, as Severus was?”
Harry looked at her. Something warm touched his gaze, brieﬂy before it was quashed. “I will continue to be an ordinary student to every
member of the staﬀ who is not insane or evil, provided that they do
not come under pressure from others who are.” Harry glanced brieﬂy at
Severus, then turned back to Dumbledore. “Leave Minerva alone, and
I’ll be a regular Hogwarts student in her presence. No special privileges
or immunities.”
“Beautiful,” Dumbledore said sincerely. “Spoken like a true hero.”
“And,” she said, “Mr. Potter must publicly apologize for his actions
of today.”
Harry gave her another look. This one was a bit skeptical.
“The discipline of the school has been gravely injured by your actions, Mr. Potter,” Minerva said. “It must be restored.”
“I think, Professor McGonagall, that you considerably overestimate
the importance of what you call school discipline, as compared to having
History taught by a live teacher or not torturing your students. Main*

296 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

taining the current status hierarchy and enforcing its rules seems ever so
much more wise and moral and important when you are on the top and
doing the enforcing than when you are on the bottom, and I can cite
studies to this eﬀect if required. I could go on for several hours about
this point, but I will leave it at that.”
Minerva shook her head. “Mr. Potter, you underestimate the importance of discipline because you are not in need of it yourself—” She
paused. That hadn’t come out right, and Severus, Dumbledore, and even
Harry were giving her strange looks. “To learn, I mean. Not every child
can learn in the absence of authority. And it is the other children who
will be hurt, Mr. Potter, if they see your example as one to be followed.”
Harry’s lips curved into a twisted smile. “The ﬁrst and last resort is
the truth. The truth is that I shouldn’t have gotten angry, I shouldn’t
have disrupted the class, I shouldn’t have done what I did, and I set a bad
example for everyone. The truth is also that Severus Snape behaved in
a fashion unbecoming a Hogwarts professor, and that from now on he
will be more mindful of the injured feelings of students in their fourth
year and under. The two of us could both get up and speak the truth. I
could live with that.”
“In your dreams, Potter!” spat Severus.
“After all,” said Harry, smiling grimly, “if the students see that rules
are for everyone... for professors too, not just for poor helpless students
who get nothing but suﬀering out of the system... why, the positive effects on school discipline should be tremendous.”
There was a brief pause, and then Dumbledore chuckled. “Minerva
is thinking that you’re righter than you have any right to be.”
Harry’s gaze jerked away from Dumbledore, down to the ﬂoor. “Are
you reading her mind?”
“Common sense is often mistaken for Legilimency,” said Dumbledore. “I shall talk over this matter with Severus, and no apology will
be required from you unless he apologizes as well. And now I declare
this matter concluded, at least until lunchtime.” He paused. “Although,
Harry, I’m afraid that Minerva wished to speak with you about an additional matter. And that is not the result of any pressure on my part.
Minerva, if you would?”
*

297 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

Minerva rose from her chair and almost fell. There was too much
adrenaline in her blood, her heart was beating too fast.
“Fawkes,” said Dumbledore, “accompany her, please.”
“I don’t—” she started to say.
Dumbledore shot her a look, and she fell silent.
The phoenix soared across the room like a smooth tongue of ﬂame
leaping out, and landed on her shoulder. She felt the warmth through
her robes, all through her body.
“Please follow me, Mr. Potter,” she said, ﬁrmly now, and they left
through the door.

**
*
They stood on the rotating stairs, descending in silence.
Minerva didn’t know what to say. She didn’t know this person who
stood beside her.
And Fawkes began to croon.
It was tender, and soft, like a ﬁreplace would sound if it had melody,
and it washed over Minerva’s mind, easing, soothing, gentling what it
touched...
“What is that?” Harry whispered beside her. His voice was unstable,
wobbling, changing pitch.
“The song of the phoenix,” said Minerva, not really aware of what
she was saying, her attention was all on that strange quiet music. “It,
too, heals.”
Harry turned his face from her, but she caught a glimpse of something agonized.
The descent seemed to take a very long time, or maybe it was only
that the music seemed to take a very long time, and when they stepped
out through the gap where a gargoyle had been, she was holding Harry’s
hand ﬁrmly in hers.
As the gargoyle stepped back into place, Fawkes left her shoulder,
and swooped to hover in front of Harry.
Harry stared at Fawkes like someone hypnotized by the ever-changing light of a ﬁre.
*

298 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

“What am I to do, Fawkes?” whispered Harry. “I couldn’t have protected them if I hadn’t been angry.”
The phoenix’s wings continued ﬂapping, it continued hovering in
place. There was no sound but the beating of the wings. Then there was
a ﬂash like a ﬁre ﬂaring up and going out, and Fawkes was gone.
Both of them blinked, like waking up from a dream, or maybe like
falling asleep again.
Minerva looked down.
Harry Potter’s bright young face looked up at her.
“Are phoenixes people?” said Harry. “I mean, are they smart enough
to count as people? Could I talk with Fawkes if I knew how?”
Minerva blinked hard. Then she blinked again. “No,” Minerva said,
her voice wavering. “Phoenixes are creatures of powerful magic. That
magic gives their existence a weight of meaning which no simple animal
could possess. They are ﬁre, light, healing, rebirth. But in the end, no.”
“Where can I get one?”
Minerva leaned down and hugged him. She hadn’t meant to, but she
didn’t seem to have much choice in the matter.
When she stood up she found it hard to speak. But she had to ask.
“What happened today, Harry?”
“I don’t know the answers to any of the important questions either.
Aside from that I’d really rather not think about it for a while.”
Minerva took his hand in hers again, and they walked the rest of the
way in silence.
It was only a short trip, since naturally the oﬃce of the Deputy was
close to the oﬃce of the Headmaster.
Minerva sat behind her desk.
Harry sat in front of her desk.
“So,” Minerva whispered. She would have given almost anything not
to do this, or not to be the one who had to do it, or for it to be any time
but right now. “There is a matter of school discipline. From which you
are not exempt.”
“Namely?” said Harry.
He didn’t know. He hadn’t ﬁgured it out yet. She felt her throat
tighten. But there was work to be done and she would not shirk it.
*

299 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

“Mr. Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, “I need to see your TimeTurner, please.”
All the peace of the phoenix vanished from his face in an instant and
Minerva felt like she had just stabbed him.
“No!” Harry said. His voice was panicked. “I need it, I won’t be able
to attend Hogwarts, I won’t be able to sleep!”
“You’ll be able to sleep,” she said. “The Ministry has delivered the
protective shell for your Time-Turner. I will enchant it to open only
between the hours of 9pm and midnight.”
Harry’s face twisted. “But—but I—”
“Mr. Potter, how many times have you used the Time-Turner since
Monday? How many hours?”
“I...” Harry said. “Hold on, let me add it up—” He glanced down at
his watch.
Minerva felt a rush of sadness. She’d thought so. “It wasn’t just two
per day, then. I suspect that if I asked your dormmates, I would ﬁnd that
you were struggling to stay up long enough to go to sleep at a reasonable
time, and waking up earlier and earlier every morning. Correct?”
Harry’s face said everything she needed to know.
“Mr. Potter,” she said gently, “there are students who cannot be entrusted with Time-Turners, because they become addicted to them. We
give them a potion which lengthens their sleep cycle by the necessary
amount, but they end up using the Time-Turner for more than just attending their classes. And so we must take them back. Mr. Potter, you
have taken to using the Time-Turner as your solution to everything,
often very foolishly so. You used it to get back a Remembrall. You vanished from a closet in a fashion apparent to other students, instead of
going back after you were out and getting me or someone else to come
and open the door.”
From the look on Harry’s face he hadn’t thought of that.
“And more importantly,” she said, “you should have simply sat in
Professor Snape’s class. And watched. And left at the end of class. As
you would have done if you had not possessed a Time-Turner. There are
some students who cannot be entrusted with Time-Turners, Mr. Potter.
You are one of them. I am sorry.”
*

300 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

“But I need it!” Harry blurted. “What if there are Slytherins threatening me and I have to escape? It keeps me safe—”
“Every other student in this castle runs the same risk, and I assure
you that they survive. No student has died in this castle for ﬁfty years.
Mr. Potter, you will hand over your Time-Turner and do so now.”
Harry’s face twisted in agony, but he drew out the Time-Turner from
under his robes and gave it to her.
From her desk, Minerva drew out one of the protective shells that
had been sent to Hogwarts. She snapped the cover into place around
the Time-Turner’s turning hourglass, tapped her wand to lock it there,
and then she laid her wand on the cover, casting a simple but permanent
enchantment.
“This isn’t fair!” Harry shrieked. “I saved half of Hogwarts from
Professor Snape today, is it right that I be punished for it? I saw the look
on your face, you hated what he was doing!”
Minerva didn’t speak for a few moments. She was enchanting.
When she ﬁnished and looked up, she knew that her face was stern.
Maybe it was the wrong thing to do. And then again maybe it was the
right thing to do. There was an obstinate child in front of her, and that
didn’t mean the universe was broken.
“Fair, Mr. Potter?” she snapped. “I have had to ﬁle two reports with
the Ministry on public use of a Time-Turner in two successive days! Be
extremely grateful you were allowed to retain the Time-Turner even in
restricted form! The Headmaster made a Floo call to plead with them
personally and if you were not the Boy-Who-Lived even that would not
have suﬃced!”
Harry gaped at her.
She knew that he was seeing the angry face of Professor McGonagall.
Harry’s eyes ﬁlled up with tears.
“I’m, sorry,” he whispered, voice now choked and broken. “I’m
sorry, to have, disappointed you...”
“I’m sorry too, Mr. Potter,” she said sternly, and handed him the
newly restricted Time-Turner. “You may go.”
Harry turned and ﬂed from her oﬃce, sobbing. She heard his feet
pattering away down the hall, and then the sound cut oﬀ as the door
*

301 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

swung closed.
“I’m sorry too, Harry,” she whispered to the quiet room. “I’m sorry
too.”

**
*
Fifteen minutes into lunch hour.
No one was speaking to Harry. Some of the Ravenclaws were shooting him looks of anger, others of sympathy, a few of the youngest students even had looks of admiration, but no one was talking to him. Even
Hermione hadn’t tried to come over.
Fred and George had gingerly stepped near. They hadn’t said anything. The oﬀer was clear, and its optionality. Harry had told them that
he would come over when dessert started, no earlier. They had nodded
and quickly walked away.
It was probably the utterly expressionless look on Harry’s face that
was doing it.
The others probably thought he was controlling anger, or dismay.
They knew, because they’d seen Flitwick come and get him, that he’d
been called to the Headmaster’s oﬃce.
Harry was trying not to smile, because if he smiled, he would start
laughing, and if he started laughing, he wouldn’t stop until the nice people in white jackets came to haul him away.
It was too much. It was just all too much. Harry had almost gone
over to the Dark Side, his dark side had done things that seemed in retrospect insane, his dark side had won an impossible victory that might
have been real and might have been a pure whim of a crazy Headmaster,
his dark side had protected his friends. He just couldn’t handle it any
more. He needed Fawkes to sing to him again. He needed to use the
Time-Turner to go oﬀ and take a quiet hour to recover but that wasn’t
an option any more and the loss was like a hole in his existence but he
couldn’t think about that because then he might start laughing.
Twenty minutes. All the students who were going to eat lunch had
arrived, almost none had departed.
The tapping of a spoon rang through the Great Hall.
*

302 *

**
*

DOMINANCE HIERARCHIES

*
*

*

“If I may have your attention please,” Dumbledore said. “Harry Potter has something he would like to share with us.”
Harry took a deep breath and got up. He walked over to the Head
Table, with every eye staring at him.
Harry turned and looked out at the four tables.
It was becoming harder and harder not to smile, but Harry kept his
face expressionless as he spoke his brief and memorized speech.
“The truth is sacred,” Harry said tonelessly. “One of my most treasured possessions is a button which reads ‘Speak the truth, even if your
voice trembles’. This, then, is the truth. Remember that. I am not saying it because I am being forced to say it, I am saying it because it is
true. What I did in Professor Snape’s class was foolish, stupid, childish,
and an inexcusable violation of the rules of Hogwarts. I disrupted the
classroom and deprived my fellow students of their irreplaceable learning time. All because I failed to control my temper. I hope that not a
single one of you will ever follow my example. I certainly intend to try
never to follow it again.”
Many of the students gazing at Harry now had solemn, unhappy
looks upon their faces, such as one might see at a ceremony marking the
loss of a fallen champion. At the younger parts of the Gryﬃndor table
the look was almost universal.
Until Harry raised his hand.
He did not raise it high. That might have appeared preemptory. He
certainly did not raise it toward Severus. Harry simply raised his hand
to chest level, and softly snapped his ﬁngers, a gesture that was seen more
than heard. It was possible that most of the Head Table wouldn’t see it
at all.
This seeming gesture of deﬁance won sudden smiles from the younger students and Gryﬃndors, and coldly superior sneers from Slytherin,
and frowns and worried looks from all others.
Harry kept his face expressionless. “Thank you,” he said. “That’s
all.”
“Thank you, Mr. Potter,” said the Headmaster. “And now Professor
Snape has something to share with us as well.”
Severus smoothly stood up from his place at the Head Table. “It has
*

303 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

*
*

*

been brought to my attention,” he said, “that my own actions played a
part in provoking the admittedly inexcusable anger of Mr. Potter, and in
the ensuing discussion I realized that I had forgotten how easily injured
are the feelings of the young and immature. The Potions classroom is a
dangerous place, and I still feel that strict discipline is necessary—”
There was the sound of many people emitting muﬄed chokes at the
same time.
Severus continued as if he had not heard. “—but henceforth I will
be more aware of the... emotional fragility... of students in their fourth
year and younger. My deduction of points from Ravenclaw still stands,
but I will revoke Mr. Potter’s detention. Thank you.”
There was a single clap from the direction of Gryﬃndor and faster
than lightning Severus’s wand was in his hand and “Quietus!” silenced
the oﬀender.
“I will still demand discipline and respect in all my classes,” Severus
said coldly, “and anyone who triﬂes with me will regret it.”
He sat down.
“Thank you too!” Headmaster Dumbledore said cheerfully. “Carry
on!”
And Harry, still expressionless, began to walk back to his seat in
Ravenclaw.
There was an explosion of conversation. Two words were clearly
identiﬁable in the beginning. The ﬁrst was an initial “What—” beginning
many diﬀerent sentences such as “What just happened—” and “What the
hell—” The second was “Scourgify!” as students cleaned up the dropped
food and spit-out drinks from themselves, the tablecloth, and each other.
Some students were weeping openly. So was Professor Sprout.
At the Gryﬃndor table, where a cake waited with ﬁfty-one unlit
candles, Fred whispered, “I think we may be out of our league here,
George.”
And from that day onward, no matter what Hermione tried to tell
anyone, it would be an accepted legend of Hogwarts that Harry Potter
could make absolutely anything happen by snapping his ﬁngers.

*

304 *

CHAPTER

NINETEEN

DELAYED GRATIFICATION
raco had a stern expression on his face, and his green-trimmed robes
somehow looked far more formal, serious, and well-turned-out
than the same exact robes as worn by the two boys behind him.
“Talk,” said Draco.
“Yeah! Talk!”
“You heard da boss! Talk!”
“You two, on the other hand, shut up.”
The last session of classes on Friday was about to start, in that vast
auditorium where all four Houses learned Defense, er, Battle Magic.
The last session of classes on Friday.
Harry was hoping that this class would be non-stressful, and that
the brilliant Professor Quirrell would realize this was perhaps not the
best time to single out Harry for anything. Harry had recovered a little,
but...
...but just in case, it was probably best to get in a bit of stress relief
ﬁrst.
Harry leaned back in his chair and bestowed a look of great solemnity upon Draco and his minions.
“You ask, what is our aim?” Harry declaimed. “I can answer in one
word. It is victory. Victory at all costs—Victory in spite of all terrors—
Victory, however long and hard the road may be, for without victory
there is no—”
“Talk about Snape,” Draco hissed. “What did you do?”
Harry wiped away the fake solemnity and gave Draco a more serious
look.
“You saw it,” Harry said. “Everyone saw it. I snapped my ﬁngers.”

D

*

305 *

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

“Harry! Stop teasing me!”
So he’d been promoted to Harry now. Interesting. And in fact Harry
was fairly sure that he was meant to notice that, and feel bad if he didn’t
respond somehow...
Harry tapped his ears and gave a signiﬁcant glance at the minions.
“They won’t talk,” said Draco.
“Draco,” Harry said, “I’m going to be one hundred percent honest here and say that yesterday I was not particularly impressed with
Mr. Goyle’s cunning.”
Mr. Goyle winced.
“Me neither,” said Draco. “I explained to him that I ended up owing
you a favor because of it.” (Mr. Goyle winced again.) “But there is a big
diﬀerence between that sort of mistake and being indiscreet. That really
is something they’ve been trained from childhood to understand.”
“All right then,” Harry said. He lowered his voice, even though the
background noises had gone to blurs in Draco’s presence. “I deduced
one of Severus’s secrets and did a bit of blackmail.”
Draco’s expression hardened. “Good, now tell me something you
didn’t tell in strict conﬁdence to the idiots in Gryﬃndor, meaning that
was the story you wanted to get all over the school.”
Harry grinned involuntarily and he knew that Draco had caught it.
“What is Severus saying?” Harry said.
“That he hadn’t realized how sensitive the feelings of young children
were,” Draco said. “Even in Slytherin! Even to me!”
“Are you sure,” Harry said, “that you want to know something your
Head of House would rather you not know?”
“Yes,” Draco said without hesitation.
Interesting. “Then you really are going to send your minions away
ﬁrst, because I’m not sure I can believe everything you believe about
them.”
Draco nodded. “Okay.”
Mr. Crabbe and Mr. Goyle looked very unhappy. “Boss—” said
Mr. Crabbe.
“You’ve given Mr. Potter no reason to trust you,” Draco said. “Go!”
They left.
*

306 *

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

“In particular,” Harry said, lowering his voice even further, “I’m not
entirely sure that they wouldn’t just report what I said to Lucius.”
“Father wouldn’t do that!” Draco said, looking genuinely aghast.
“They’re mine!”
“I’m sorry, Draco,” Harry said. “I’m just not sure I can believe everything you believe about your father. Imagine it was your secret and
me telling you my father wouldn’t do that.”
Draco nodded slowly. “You’re right. I’m sorry, Harry. It was wrong
of me to ask it of you.”
How did I get this promoted? Shouldn’t he hate me now? Harry had
the feeling he was looking at something exploitable... he just wished his
brain wasn’t so exhausted. Ordinarily he would have loved to try his
hand at some complicated plotting.
“Anyway,” Harry said. “Trade. I tell you a fact that isn’t on the
grapevine, and does not go on the grapevine, and in particular does not
go to your father, and in return you tell me what you and Slytherin think
about the whole business.”
“Deal!”
Now to make this as vague as possible... something that wouldn’t
hurt much even if it did get out... “What I said was true. I did discover
one of Severus’s secrets, and I did do some blackmail. But Severus wasn’t
the only person involved.”
“I knew it!” Draco said exultantly.
Harry’s stomach sank. He had apparently said something very signiﬁcant and he did not know why. This was not a good sign.
“All right,” Draco said. He was grinning widely now. “So here’s
what the reaction was like in Slytherin. First, all the idiots were like,
‘We hate Harry Potter! Let’s go beat him up!’”
Harry choked. “What is wrong with the Sorting Hat? That’s not
Slytherin, it’s Gryﬃndor—”
“Not all children are prodigies,” Draco said, though he was smiling in
a sort of nasty-conspiratorial way, as though to suggest that he privately
agreed with Harry’s opinion. “And it took around ﬁfteen seconds for
someone to explain to them why this might not be such a favor to Snape,
so you’re ﬁne. Anyway, after that was the second wave of idiots, the ones
*

307 *

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

who were saying, ‘Looks like Harry Potter was just another do-gooder
after all.’”
“And then?” Harry said, smiling even though he had no idea why
that was stupid.
“And then the actual smart people started talking. It’s obvious that
you found a way to put a lot of pressure on Snape. And while that could
be more than one thing... the obvious next thought is that it has something to do with Snape’s unknown hold over Dumbledore. Am I right?”
“No comment,” Harry said. At least his brain was processing this
part correctly. House Slytherin had wondered why Severus wasn’t getting ﬁred. And they’d concluded that Severus was blackmailing Dumbledore. Could that actually be true...? But Dumbledore hadn’t seemed
to act like it...
Draco went on talking. “And the next thing the smart people pointed
out was that if you could put enough pressure on Snape to make him
leave half of Hogwarts alone, that meant you probably had enough
power to get rid of him entirely, if you wanted. What you did to him
was a humiliation, just the same way he tried to humiliate you—but you
left us our Head of House.”
Harry made his smile wider.
“And then the really smart people,” Draco said, his face now serious,
“went oﬀ and had a little discussion by themselves, and someone pointed
out that it would be a very stupid thing to leave an enemy around like
that. If you could break his hold over Dumbledore, the obvious thing
would be to just do it. Dumbledore would kick Snape out of Hogwarts
and maybe even have him killed, he’d be very grateful to you, and you
wouldn’t have to worry about Snape sneaking into your dorm room at
night with interesting potions.”
Harry’s face was now neutral. He had not thought of that and he
really, really should have. “And from this you concluded...?”
“Snape’s hold was some secret of Dumbledore’s and you’ve got the
secret!” Draco was looking exultant. “It can’t be powerful enough to destroy Dumbledore entirely, or Snape would have used it by now. Snape
refuses to use his hold for anything except staying king of Slytherin
House in Hogwarts, and he doesn’t always get what he wants even then,
*

308 *

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

so it must have limits. But it’s got to be really good! Father’s been trying
to get Snape to tell him for years!”
“And,” Harry said, “now Lucius thinks maybe I can tell him. Did
you already get an owl—”
“I will tonight,” Draco said, and laughed. “It will say,” his voice took
on a diﬀerent, more formal cadence, “My beloved son: I’ve already told
you of Harry Potter’s potential importance. As you have already realized,
his importance has now become greater and more urgent. If you see any
possible avenue of friendship or point of pressure with him, you must pursue
it, and the full resources of Malfoy are at your disposal if needed.”
Gosh. “Well,” Harry said, “not commenting on whether or not your
whole complicated ediﬁce of theory is true, let me just say that we are
not quite such good friends as yet.”
“I know,” Draco said. Then his face turned very serious, and his voice
grew quiet even within the blur. “Harry, has it occurred to you that if
you know something Dumbledore doesn’t want known, Dumbledore
might simply have you killed? And it would turn the Boy-Who-Lived
from a potential competing leader into a valuable martyr, too.”
“No comment,” Harry said yet again. He hadn’t thought of that last
part, either. Didn’t seem to be Dumbledore’s style... but...
“Harry,” Draco said, “you’ve obviously got incredible talent, but
you’ve got no training and no mentors and you do stupid things sometimes and you really need an advisor who knows how to do this or you’re
going to get hurt!” Draco’s face was ﬁerce.
“Ah,” Harry said. “An advisor like Lucius?”
“Like me!” said Draco. “I’ll promise to keep your secrets from Father,
from everyone, I’ll just help you ﬁgure out whatever you want to do!”
Wow.
Harry saw that zombie-Quirrell was staggering in through the doors.
“Class is about to start,” said Harry. “I’ll think about what you said,
there’s lots of times I do wish I had all your training, it’s just I don’t
know how I can trust you so quickly—”
“You shouldn’t,” Draco said, “it’s too soon. See? I’ll give you good
advice even if it hurts me. But we should maybe hurry up and become
closer friends.”
*

309 *

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

“I’m open to that,” said Harry, who was already trying to ﬁgure out
how to exploit it.
“Another bit of advice,” Draco said hurriedly as Quirrell slouched toward his desk, “right now everyone in Slytherin’s wondering about you,
so if you’re courting us, which I think you are, you should do something
that signals friendship to Slytherin. Soon, like today or tomorrow.”
“Letting Severus go on awarding extra House points to Slytherin
wasn’t enough?” No reason Harry couldn’t take credit for it.
Draco’s eyes ﬂickered with realization, then he said rapidly, “It’s not
the same, trust me, it’s got to be something obvious. Push your mudblood rival Granger into a wall or something, everyone in Slytherin will
know what that means—”
“That is not how it works in Ravenclaw, Draco! If you have to push
someone into a wall it means your brain is too weak to beat them the
right way and everyone in Ravenclaw knows that—”
The screen on Harry’s desk ﬂickered on, provoking a sudden wash
of nostalgia for television and computers.
“Ahem,” said Professor Quirrell’s voice, seeming to speak personally
to Harry out of the screen. “Please take your seats.”

**
*
And the children were all seated and staring at the repeater screens on
their desks, or looking down directly at the great white marble stage
where Professor Quirrell stood, leaning on his desk atop the small dais
of darker marble.
“Today,” said Professor Quirrell, “I had planned to teach you your
ﬁrst defensive spell, a small shield that was the ancestor of today’s Protego. But on second thought I have changed today’s lesson plan in the
light of recent events.”
Professor Quirrell’s gaze searched the rows of seats. Harry winced
from where he was sitting, in the back row. He had a feeling he knew
who was about to be called on.
*

310

*

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

“Draco, of the Noble and Most Ancient House of Malfoy,” said Professor Quirrell.
Whew.
“Yes, Professor?” said Draco. His voice was ampliﬁed, seeming to
come from the repeater screen on Harry’s desk, which showed Draco’s
face as he spoke. Then the screen shifted back to Professor Quirrell, who
said:
“Is it your ambition to become the next Dark Lord?”
“That’s an odd question, Professor,” said Draco. “I mean, who’d be
dumb enough to admit it?”
A few students laughed, but not many.
“Indeed,” said Professor Quirrell. “So while there’s no point in asking any of you, it would not surprise me in the slightest if there were a
student or two in my classes who harbored ambitions of being the next
Dark Lord. After all, I wanted to be the next Dark Lord when I was a
young Slytherin.”
This time the laughter was much more widespread.
“Well, it is the House of the ambitious, after all,” Professor Quirrell
said, smiling. “I didn’t realize until later that what I really enjoyed was
Battle Magic, and that my true ambition was to become a great ﬁghting
wizard and someday teach at Hogwarts. In any case, when I was thirteen
years old, I read through the historical sections of the Hogwarts library,
scrutinizing the lives and fates of past Dark Lords, and I made a list of
all the mistakes that I would never make when I was a Dark Lord—”
Harry giggled before he could stop himself.
“Yes, Mr. Potter, very amusing. So, Mr. Potter, can you guess what
was the very ﬁrst item on that list?”
Great. “Um... never use a complicated way of dealing with an enemy
when you can just Abracadabra them?”
“The term, Mr. Potter, is Avada Kedavra,” Professor Quirrell’s voice
sounded a bit sharp for some reason, “and no, that was not on the list I
made at age thirteen. Would you care to guess again?”
“Ah... never brag to anyone about your evil master plan?”
Professor Quirrell laughed. “Ah, now that was number two. My,
Mr. Potter, have we been reading the same books?”
*

311

*

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

There was more laughter, with an undertone of nervousness. Harry
clenched his jaw tightly shut and said nothing. A denial would accomplish nothing.
“But no. The ﬁrst item was, ‘I will not go around provoking strong,
vicious enemies.’ The history of the world would be very diﬀerent if
Mornelithe Falconsbane or Hitler had grasped that elementary point.
Now if, Mr. Potter—just if by some chance you harbor an ambition
similar to the one I held as a young Slytherin—even so, I hope it is not
your ambition to become a stupid Dark Lord.”
“Professor Quirrell,” Harry said, gritting his teeth, “I am a Ravenclaw and it is not my ambition to be stupid, period. I know that what I
did today was dumb. But it wasn’t Dark! I was not the one who threw
the ﬁrst punch in that ﬁght!”
“You, Mr. Potter, are an idiot. But then so was I at your age. Thus
I anticipated your answer and altered today’s lesson plan accordingly.
Mr. Gregory Goyle, if you would come forward, please?”
There was a surprised pause in the classroom. Harry hadn’t been
expecting that.
Neither, from the looks of it, had Mr. Goyle, who looked rather
uncertain and worried as he mounted the marble stage and approached
the dais.
Professor Quirrell straightened from where he was leaning on the
desk. He looked suddenly stronger, and his hands formed ﬁsts and he
drew himself up into a clearly recognizable martial arts stance.
Harry’s eyes widened at the sight, and he realized why Mr. Goyle
had been called up.
“Most wizards,” Professor Quirrell said, “do not bother much with
what a Muggle would term martial arts. Is not a wand stronger than a
ﬁst? This attitude is stupid. Wands are held in ﬁsts. If you want to be a
great ﬁghting wizard you must learn martial arts to a level which would
impress even a Muggle. I will now demonstrate a certain vitally important technique, which I learned in a dojo, a Muggle school of martial
arts, of which I shall speak more shortly. For now...” Professor Quirrell
took several steps forward, still in stance, advancing on where Mr. Goyle
stood. “Mr. Goyle, I will ask you to attack me.”
*

312

*

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

“Professor Quirrell,” said Mr. Goyle, his voice now ampliﬁed as the
professor’s was, “can I ask what level—”
“Sixth dan. You will not be hurt and neither will I. And if you see
an opening, please take it.”
Mr. Goyle nodded, looking much relieved.
“Note,” Professor Quirrell said, “that Mr. Goyle was afraid to attack
someone who did not know martial arts to an acceptable level, for fear
that I, or he, would be hurt. Mr. Goyle’s attitude is exactly correct and
he has earned three Quirrell points for it. Now, ﬁght!”
The young boy blurred forward, ﬁsts ﬂying, and the Professor
blocked every blow, dancing backward, Quirrell kicked and Goyle
blocked and spun and tried to trip Quirrell with a sweeping leg and Quirrell hopped over it and it was all happening too fast for Harry to make
sense of what was going on and then Goyle was on his back with his legs
pushing and Quirrell was actually ﬂying through the air and then he hit
the ground shoulder ﬁrst and rolled.
“Stop!” cried Professor Quirrell from the ground, sounding a little
panicked. “You win!”
Mr. Goyle pulled up so sharply he staggered, almost tripping and
falling from the aborted momentum of his headlong charge toward Professor Quirrell. His face showed utter shock.
Professor Quirrell arched his back and bounced to his feet using a
peculiar springing motion that made no use of his hands.
There was a silence in the classroom, a silence born of total confusion.
“Mr. Goyle,” said Professor Quirrell, “what vitally important technique did I demonstrate?”
“How to fall correctly when someone throws you,” said Mr. Goyle.
“It’s one of the very ﬁrst lessons you learn—”
“That too,” said Professor Quirrell.
There was a pause.
“The vitally important technique which I demonstrated,” said Professor Quirrell, “was how to lose. You may go, Mr. Goyle, thank you.”
Mr. Goyle walked oﬀ the platform, looking rather bewildered.
Harry felt the same way.
*

313

*

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

Professor Quirrell walked back to his desk and resumed leaning on
it. “Sometimes we forget the most basic things, since it has been too
long since we learned them. I realized I had done the same with my own
lesson plan. You do not teach students to throw until you have taught
them to fall. And I must not teach you to ﬁght if you do not understand
how to lose.”
Professor Quirrell’s face hardened, and Harry thought he saw a hint
of pain, a touch of sorrow, in those eyes. “I learned how to lose in a
dojo in Asia, which, as any Muggle knows, is where all the good martial artists live. This dojo taught a style which had a reputation among
ﬁghting wizards as adapting well to magical dueling. The Master of that
dojo—an old man by Muggle standards—was that style’s greatest living
teacher. He had no idea that magic existed, of course. I applied to study
there, and was one of the few students accepted that year, from among
many contenders. There might have been a tiny bit of special inﬂuence
involved.”
There was some laughter in the classroom. Harry didn’t share it.
That hadn’t been right at all.
“In any case. During one of my ﬁrst ﬁghts, after I had been beaten in
a particularly humiliating fashion, I lost control and attacked my sparring partner—”
Yikes.
“—thankfully with my ﬁsts, rather than my magic. The Master, surprisingly, did not expel me on the spot. But he told me that there was a
ﬂaw in my temperament. He explained it to me, and I knew that he was
right. And then he said that I would learn how to lose.”
Professor Quirrell’s face was expressionless.
“Upon his strict orders, all of the students of the dojo lined up. One
by one, they approached me. I was not to defend myself. I was only
to beg for mercy. One by one, they slapped me, or punched me, and
pushed me to the ground. Some of them spat on me. They called me
awful names in their language. And to each one, I had to say, ‘I lose!’
and similar such things, such as ‘I beg you to stop!’ and ‘I admit you’re
better than me!’”
Harry was trying to imagine this and simply failing. There was no
*

314

*

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

way something like that could have happened to the digniﬁed Professor
Quirrell.
“I was a prodigy of Battle Magic even then. With wandless magic
alone I could have killed everyone in that dojo. I did not do so. I learned
to lose. To this day I remember it as one of the most unpleasant hours
of my life. And when I left that dojo eight months later—which was
not nearly enough time, but was all I could aﬀord to spend—the Master
told me that he hoped I understood why that had been necessary. And I
told him that it was one of the most valuable lessons I had ever learned.
Which was, and is, true.”
Professor Quirrell’s face turned bitter. “You are wondering where
this marvelous dojo is, and whether you can study there. You cannot.
For not long afterward, another would-be student came to that hidden
place, to that remote mountain. He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named.”
There was the sound of many breaths being drawn in simultaneously.
Harry felt sick to his stomach. He knew what was coming.
“The Dark Lord came to that school openly, without disguise, glowing red eyes and all. The students tried to bar his way and he simply Apparated through. There was terror there, but discipline, and the Master
came forth. And the Dark Lord demanded—not asked, but demanded—
to be taught.”
Professor Quirrell’s face was very hard. “Perhaps the Master had read
too many books telling the lie that a true martial artist could defeat even
demons. For whatever reason, the Master refused. The Dark Lord asked
why he could not be a student. The Master told him he had no patience,
and that was when the Dark Lord ripped his tongue out.”
There was a collective gasp.
“You can guess what happened next. The students tried to rush the
Dark Lord and fell over, stunned where they stood. And then...”
Professor Quirrell’s voice faltered for a moment, then resumed.
“There is an Unforgiveable Curse, the Cruciatus Curse, which produces unbearable pain. If the Cruciatus is extended for longer than a few
minutes it produces permanent insanity. One by one, the Dark Lord
Crucioed the Master’s students into insanity, and then ﬁnished them oﬀ
with the Killing Curse, while the Master was forced to watch. When
*

315

*

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

all his students had died in this way, the Master followed. I learned this
from the single surviving student, whom the Dark Lord had left alive to
tell the tale, and who had been a friend of mine...”
Professor Quirrell turned away, and when he turned back a moment
later, he once again seemed calm and composed.
“Dark Wizards cannot keep their tempers,” Professor Quirrell said
quietly. “It is a nearly universal ﬂaw of the species, and anyone who
makes a habit of ﬁghting them soon learns to rely on it. Understand
that the Dark Lord did not win that day. His goal was to learn martial
arts, and yet he left without a single lesson. The Dark Lord was foolish
to wish that story retold. It did not show his strength, but rather an
exploitable weakness.”
Professor Quirrell’s gaze focused on a single child in the classroom.
“Harry Potter,” Professor Quirrell said.
“Yes,” Harry said, his voice hoarse.
“What precisely did you do wrong today, Mr. Potter?”
Harry felt like he was going to throw up. “I lost my temper.”
“That is not precise,” said Professor Quirrell. “I will describe it more
exactly. There are many animals which have what are called dominance
contests. They rush at each other with horns—trying to knock each
other down, not gore each other. They ﬁght with their paws—with claws
sheathed. But why with their claws sheathed? Surely, if they used their
claws, they would stand a better chance of winning? But then their enemy might unsheathe their claws as well, and instead of resolving the
dominance contest with a winner and a loser, both of them might be
severely hurt.”
Professor Quirrell gaze seemed to come straight out at Harry from
the repeater screen. “What you demonstrated today, Mr. Potter, is that—
unlike those animals who keep their claws sheathed and accept the results—you do not know how to lose a dominance contest. When a Hogwarts professor challenged you, you did not back down. When it looked
like you might lose, you unsheathed your claws, heedless of the danger.
You escalated, and then you escalated again. It started with a slap at you
from Professor Snape, who was obviously dominant over you. Instead
of losing, you slapped back and lost ten points from Ravenclaw. Soon
*

316

*

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

you were talking about leaving Hogwarts. The fact that you escalated
even further in some unknown direction, and somehow won at the end,
does not change the fact that you are an idiot.”
“I understand,” Harry said. His throat was dry. That had been
precise. Frighteningly precise. Now that Professor Quirrell had said it,
Harry could see in hindsight that it was an exactly accurate description
of what had happened. When someone’s model of you was that good,
you had to wonder whether they were right about other things too, like
your intent to kill.
“The next time, Mr. Potter, that you choose to escalate a contest
rather than lose, you may lose all the stakes you place on the table. I
cannot guess what they were today. I can guess that they were far, far
too high for the loss of ten House points.”
Like the fate of magical Britain. That was what he’d done.
“You will protest that you were trying to help all of Hogwarts, a
much more important goal worthy of great risks. That is a lie. If you
had been—”
“I would have taken the slap, waited, and picked the best possible
time to make my move,” Harry said, his voice hoarse. “But that would
have meant losing. Letting him be dominant over me. It was what the
Dark Lord couldn’t do with the Master he wanted to learn from.”
Professor Quirrell nodded. “I see that you have understood perfectly.
And so, Mr. Potter, today you are going to learn how to lose.”
“I—”
“I will not hear any objections, Mr. Potter. It is evident both that you
need this and that you are strong enough to take it. I assure you that your
experience will not be so harsh as what I went through, though you may
well remember it as the worst ﬁfteen minutes of your young life.”
Harry swallowed. “Professor Quirrell,” he said in a small voice, “can
we do this some other time?”
“No,” Professor Quirrell said simply. “You are ﬁve days into your
Hogwarts education and already this has happened. Today is Friday.
Our next defense class is on Wednesday. Saturday, Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday... No, we do not have time to wait.”
There were a few laughs at this, but very few.
*

317

*

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

“Please consider it an order from your professor, Mr. Potter. What
I would like to say is that otherwise I will not teach you any oﬀensive
spells, because I would then hear that you had severely hurt or even
killed someone. Unfortunately I am told that your ﬁngers are already
powerful weapons. Do not snap them at any time during this lesson.”
More scattered laughter, sounding rather nervous.
Harry felt like he might cry. “Professor Quirrell, if you do anything
like what you talked about, it’s going to make me angry, and I really
would rather not get angry again today—”
“The point is not to avoid getting angry,” Professor Quirrell said, his
face looking grave. “Anger is natural. You need to learn how to lose even
when you are angry. Or at least pretend to lose so that you can plan your
vengeance. As I did with Mr. Goyle today, unless of course any of you
think he really is better—”
“I’m not!” shouted Mr. Goyle from his desk, sounding a little frantic.
“I know you didn’t really lose! Please don’t plan any vengeances!”
Harry felt sick to his stomach. Professor Quirrell didn’t know about
his mysterious dark side. “Professor, we really need to talk about this
after class—”
“We will,” Professor Quirrell said in the tones of a promise. “After
you learn how to lose.” His face was serious. “It should go without
saying that I will exclude anything which could injure you or even cause
you signiﬁcant pain. The pain will come from the diﬃculty of losing,
instead of ﬁghting back and escalating the battle until you win.”
Harry’s breath was coming in short, panicky pants. He was more
frightened than he’d been after leaving the Potions classroom. “Professor
Quirrell,” he managed to say, “I don’t want you to get ﬁred over this—”
“I will not be,” Professor Quirrell said, “if you tell them afterward
that it was necessary. And this I trust you to do.” For a moment Professor Quirrell’s voice turned very dry. “Believe me, they have tolerated
worse in their hallways. This case will be exceptional only in that it
happens within a classroom.”
“Professor Quirrell,” Harry whispered, but he thought his voice was
still being repeated everywhere, “do you really believe that if I don’t do
this, I might hurt someone?”
*

318

*

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

“Yes,” Professor Quirrell said simply.
“Then,” Harry felt nauseous, “I’ll do it.”
Professor Quirrell turned to regard the Slytherins. “So... with the
full approval of your teacher, and in such a fashion that Snape cannot be
blamed for your actions... do any of you wish to show your dominance
over the Boy-Who-Lived? Shove him around, push him to the ground,
hear him beg for your mercy?”
Five hands went up.
“Everyone with your hand raised, you are an absolute idiot. What
part of pretending to lose did you not understand? If Harry Potter does
become the next Dark Lord he will hunt you down and kill you after he
graduates.”
The ﬁve hands dropped abruptly back to their desks.
“I won’t,” Harry said, his voice coming out rather weakly. “I swear
never to take vengeance upon those who help me learn to lose. Professor
Quirrell... would you please... stop that?”
Professor Quirrell sighed. “I am sorry, Mr. Potter. I realize that you
must ﬁnd this equally annoying whether you intend to become a Dark
Lord or not. But those children also had an important life lesson to learn.
Would it be acceptable if I awarded you a Quirrell point in apology?”
“Make it two,” Harry said.
There was a current of surprised laughter, defusing some of the tension.
“Done,” Professor Quirrell said.
“And after I graduate I’m going to hunt you down and tickle you.”
There was more laughter, although Professor Quirrell didn’t smile.
Harry felt like he was wrestling an anaconda, trying to force the conversation through the narrow course that would make people realize he
wasn’t a Dark Lord after all... why was Professor Quirrell so suspicious
of him?
“Professor,” said Draco’s unampliﬁed voice. “It is also not my own
ambition to become a stupid Dark Lord.”
There was a shocked silence in the classroom.
You don’t have to do this! Harry almost blurted out loud, but checked
himself in time; Draco might not wish it known that he was doing this
*

319

*

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

out of friendship for Harry... or out of the desire to appear friendly...
Calling that a desire to appear friendly made Harry feel small, and
mean. If Draco had intended to impress him, it was working perfectly.
Professor Quirrell was regarding Draco gravely. “You worry that
you cannot pretend to lose, Mr. Malfoy? That this ﬂaw which describes
Mr. Potter also describes you? Surely your father taught you better.”
“When it comes to talking, maybe,” said Draco, now on the repeater
screen. “Not when it comes to being shoved around and pushed to the
ground. I want to be fully as strong as you, Professor Quirrell.”
Professor Quirrell’s eyebrows went up and stayed up. “I am afraid,
Mr. Malfoy,” he said after a time, “that the arrangements I made for
Mr. Potter, involving some older Slytherins who will be told afterward
how stupid they were, would not carry over onto you. But it is my professional opinion that you are already very strong. Should I hear that
you have failed, as Mr. Potter failed today, I will make the appropriate
arrangements and apologize to you and whomever you have hurt. I do
not think this will be necessary, however.”
“I understand, professor,” said Draco.
Professor Quirrell looked over the class. “Does anyone else wish to
become strong?”
Some students glanced around nervously. Some, Harry thought
from his back row, looked like they were opening their mouths but not
saying anything. In the end, no one spoke.
“Draco Malfoy will be one of the generals of your year’s armies,”
said Professor Quirrell, “should he deign to engage in that after-school
activity. And now, Mr. Potter, please come forward.”

**
*
Yes, Professor Quirrell had said, it must be in front of everyone, in front of
your friends, because that is where Snape confronted you and that is where
you must learn to lose.
*

320 *

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

So now the ﬁrst year watched. In magically enforced silence, and
with requests from both Harry and the professor not to intervene. Hermione had her face turned away, but she hadn’t spoken out or even given
him any sort of signiﬁcant look, maybe because she’d been there in Potions too.
Harry stood on a soft blue mat, such as might be found in a Muggle
dojo, which Professor Quirrell had laid out upon the ﬂoor for when
Harry was pushed down.
Harry was frightened of what he might do. If Professor Quirrell was
right about his intent to kill...
Harry’s wand lay on Professor Quirrell’s desk, not because Harry
knew any spells that could defend him, but because otherwise (Harry
thought) he might have tried to jam it through someone’s eye socket.
His pouch lay there, now containing his protected but still potentially
fragile Time-Turner.
Harry had pleaded with Professor Quirrell to Transﬁgure him some
boxing gloves and lock them on his hands. Professor Quirrell had given
him a look of silent understanding, and refused.
I will not go for their eyes, I will not go for their eyes, I will not go for
their eyes, it would be the end of my life in Hogwarts, I’ll be arrested, Harry
chanted to himself, trying to hammer the thought into his brain, hoping
it would stay there if his intent to kill took over.
Professor Quirrell returned, escorting thirteen older Slytherins of
diﬀerent years. Harry recognized one of them as the one he’d hit with
a pie. Two others from that confrontation were also present. The one
who’d said to stop, that they really shouldn’t do this, was missing.
“I repeat,” Professor Quirrell said, sounding very stern, “Potter is not
to be really hurt. Any and all accidents will be treated as deliberate. Do
you understand?”
The older Slytherins nodded, grinning.
“Then please feel free to take the Boy-Who-Lived down a few pegs,”
Professor Quirrell said, with a twisted smile that only the ﬁrst-years understood.
By some form of mutual consent, the pie-target was at the front of
the group.
*

321

*

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

“Potter,” said Professor Quirrell, “meet Mr. Peregrine Derrick. He
is better than you and he is about to show you that.”
Derrick strode forward and Harry’s brain screamed discordantly, he
must not run away, he must not ﬁght back—
Derrick stopped an arm’s length away from Harry.
Harry wasn’t angry yet, just frightened. And that meant he beheld
a teenage boy fully half a meter taller than himself, with clearly deﬁned
muscles, facial hair, and a grin of terrible anticipation.
“Ask him not to hurt you,” Professor Quirrell said. “Perhaps if he
sees that you’re pathetic enough, he’ll decide that you’re boring, and go
away.”
There was laughter from the watching older Slytherins.
“Please,” Harry said, his voice faltering, “don’t, hurt, me...”
“That didn’t sound very sincere,” said Professor Quirrell.
Derrick’s smile widened. The clumsy imbecile was looking very superior and...
...Harry’s blood temperature was dropping...
“Please don’t hurt me,” Harry tried again.
Professor Quirrell shook his head. “How in Merlin’s name did you
manage to make that sound like an insult, Potter? There is only one
response you can possibly expect from Mr. Derrick.”
Derrick stepped forward deliberately, and bumped into Harry.
Harry staggered back a few feet and, before he could stop himself,
straightened up icily.
“Wrong,” said Professor Quirrell, “wrong, wrong, wrong.”
“You bumped into me, Potter,” Derrick said. “Apologize.”
“I’m sorry!”
“You don’t sound sorry,” said Derrick.
Harry’s eyes widened in indignation, he had managed to make that
sound pleading—
Derrick pushed him, hard, and Harry fell to the mat on his hands
and knees.
The blue fabric seemed to waver in Harry’s vision, not far away.
He was beginning to doubt Professor Quirrell’s real motives in teaching this so-called lesson.
*

322 *

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

A foot rested on Harry’s buttocks and a moment later Harry was
pushed hard to the side, sending him sprawling on his back.
Derrick laughed. “This is fun,” he said.
All he had to do was say it was over. And report the whole thing to
the Headmaster’s oﬃce. That would be the end of this Defense Professor
and his ill-fated stay at Hogwarts and... Professor McGonagall would be
angry about that, but...
(An image of Professor McGonagall’s face ﬂashed before his eyes, she
didn’t look angry, just sad—)
“Now tell him that he’s better than you, Potter,” said Professor Quirrell’s voice.
“You’re, better, than, me.”
Harry started to raise himself and Derrick put a foot on his chest and
shoved him back down to the mat.
The world was becoming transparent as crystal. Lines of action and
their consequences stretched out before him in utter clarity. The fool
wouldn’t be expecting him to strike back, a quick hit in the groin would
stun him long enough for—
“Try again,” said Professor Quirrell and with a sudden sharp motion
Harry rolled and sprang to his feet and whirled on where stood his real
enemy, the Defense Professor—
Professor Quirrell said, “You have no patience.”
Harry faltered. His mind, well-honed in pessimism, drew a picture
of a wizened old man with blood pouring from his mouth after Harry
had ripped his tongue out—
A moment later, Derrick pushed Harry to the mat again and then
sat down on him, sending Harry’s breath whooshing out.
“Stop!” Harry screamed. “Please stop!”
“Better,” said Professor Quirrell. “That even sounded sincere.”
It had been. That was the horrible thing, the sickening thing, it had
been sincere. Harry was panting rapidly, fear and cold anger both ﬂushing through him—
“Lose,” said Professor Quirrell.
“I, lose,” Harry forced out.
“I like it,” Derrick said from on top of him. “Lose some more.”
*

323 *

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

**
*
Hands shoved Harry, sending him stumbling across the circle of older
Slytherins to another set of hands that shoved him again. Harry had
long since passed the point of trying not to cry, and was now just trying
not to fall down.
“What are you, Potter?” said Derrick.
“A, l-loser, I lose, I give up, you win, you’re b-better, than me, please
stop—”
Harry tripped over a foot and went crashing to the ground, hands
not quite able to catch himself. He was dazed for a moment, then began
struggling to his feet again—
“Enough!” said Professor Quirrell’s voice, sounding sharp enough to
cut iron. “Step away from Mr. Potter!”
Harry saw the surprised looks on their faces. The chill in his blood,
which had been ﬂowing and ebbing, smiled in cold satisfaction.
Then Harry collapsed to the mat.
Professor Quirrell talked. There were gasps from the older Slytherins.
“And I believe the scion of Malfoy has something he wants to explain
to you as well,” ﬁnished Professor Quirrell.
Draco’s voice started talking. His voice sounded almost as sharp as
professor Quirrell’s, it had acquired the same cadence Draco had used to
imitate his father, and it was saying things like could have put Slytherin
House in jeopardy and who knows how many allies in this school alone and
total lack of awareness, never mind cunning and dull thugs, useful for nothing but lackeys and something in Harry’s hindbrain, despite everything
he knew, was designating Draco as an ally.
Harry ached all over, was probably bruised, his body felt cold, his
mind utterly exhausted. He tried to think of Fawkes’s song, but without the phoenix present he couldn’t remember the melody and when he
tried to imagine it he couldn’t seem to think of anything except a bird
chirping.
*

324 *

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

Then Draco stopped talking and Professor Quirrell told the older
Slytherins they were dismissed, and Harry opened his eyes and struggled
to sit up, “Wait,” Harry said, forcing the words out, “there’s something,
I want, to say, to them—”
“Wait on Mr. Potter,” Professor Quirrell said coldly to the departing
Slytherins.
Harry swayed to his feet. He was careful not to look in the direction
of his classmates. He didn’t want to see how they were looking at him
now. He didn’t want to see their pity.
So instead Harry looked at the older Slytherins, who still seemed to
be in a state of shock. They stared back at him. Dread was on their faces.
His dark side, when it was in control, had held to the imagination of
this moment, and went on pretending to lose.
Harry said, “No one will—”
“Stop,” said Professor Quirrell. “If that’s what I think it is, please
wait until after they’re gone. They’ll hear about it later. We all have our
lessons to learn, Mr. Potter.”
“All right,” Harry said.
“You. Go.”
The older Slytherins ﬂed and the door closed behind them.
“No one’s to take any revenge on them,” Harry said hoarsely. “That’s
a request to anyone who considers themselves my friend. I had my lesson
to learn, they helped me learn it, they had their lesson to learn too, it’s
over. If you tell this story, make sure you tell that part too.”
Harry turned to look at Professor Quirrell.
“You lost,” said Professor Quirrell, his voice gentle for the ﬁrst time.
It sounded strange coming from the professor, like his voice shouldn’t
even be able to do that.
Harry had lost. There had been moments when the cold anger had
faded entirely, replaced by fear, and during those moments he’d begged
the older Slytherins and he’d meant it...
“Is the Sun still in the sky?” said Professor Quirrell, still with that
strange gentleness. “Is it still shining? Are you still alive?”
Harry managed to nod.
“Not all losing is like this,” said Professor Quirrell. “There are com*

325 *

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

promises and negotiated surrenders. There are other ways to placate bullies. There is a whole art form to manipulating others by letting them
be dominant over you. But ﬁrst, losing must be thinkable. Will you
remember how you lost?”
“Yes.”
“Will you be able to lose?”
“I... think so...”
“I think so too.” Professor Quirrell bowed so low that his thin hair
almost touched the ﬂoor. “Congratulations, Harry Potter, you win.”
There was no single source, no ﬁrst mover, the applause started all at
once like a massive thunderclap.
Harry’s couldn’t keep the shock from his face. He risked a glance
at his classmates, and he saw their faces showing not pity but awe. The
applause was coming from Ravenclaw and Gryﬃndor and Huﬄepuﬀ
and even Slytherin, probably because Draco Malfoy was applauding too.
Some students were standing up from their chairs and half of Gryﬃndor
was standing on their desks.
So Harry stood there, swaying, letting their respect wash over him,
feeling stronger, and maybe even a little healed.
Professor Quirrell waited for the applause to die away. It took quite
a while.
“Surprised, Mr. Potter?” Professor Quirrell said. His voice sounded
amused. “You have just found out that the real world does not always
work like your worst nightmares. Yes, if you had been some poor anonymous boy being abused, then they would probably have respected you
less afterward, pitied you even as they comforted you from their loftier
perches. That is human nature, I’m afraid. But you they already know
for a ﬁgure of power. And they saw you confront your fear and keep
confronting it, even though you could have walked away at any time.
Did you think less of me when I told you that I had deliberately endured
being spat upon?”
Harry felt a burning sensation in his throat and frantically clamped
down. He didn’t trust this miraculous respect enough to start crying
again in front of it.
“Your extraordinary achievement in my class deserves an extraordi*

326 *

**
*

DELAYED GRATIFICATION

*
*

*

nary reward, Harry Potter. Please accept it with my compliments on
behalf of my House, and remember from this day forward that not all
Slytherins are alike. There are Slytherins, and then there are Slytherins.”
Professor Quirrell was smiling quite broadly as he said this. “Fifty-one
points to Ravenclaw.”
There was a shocked pause and then pandemonium broke out among
the Ravenclaw students, howling and whistling and cheering.
(And in the same moment Harry felt something wrong about that,
Professor McGonagall had been right, there should have been consequences, there should have been a cost and a price to be paid, you
couldn’t just put everything back the way it was like that—)
But Harry saw the elated faces in Ravenclaw and knew he couldn’t
possibly say no.
His brain made a suggestion. It was a good suggestion. Harry could
not even believe his brain was still keeping him upright, let alone producing good suggestions.
“Professor Quirrell,” Harry said, as clearly as he could through his
burning throat. “You are everything a member of your House should
be, and I think you must be just what Salazar Slytherin had in mind
when he helped found Hogwarts. I thank you and your House,” Draco
was very slightly nodding and subtly turning his ﬁnger, keep going, “and
I think this calls for three cheers for Slytherin. With me, everyone?”
Harry paused. “Huzzah!” Only a few people managed to join in on the
ﬁrst try. “Huzzah!” This time most of Ravenclaw was in on it. “Huzzah!”
That was almost all of Ravenclaw, a scattering of Huﬄepuﬀs and around
a quarter of Gryﬃndor.
Draco’s hand moved into a small, quick, thumbs-up gesture.
Most of the Slytherins had expressions of sheer shock. A few were
staring at Professor Quirrell in wonder. Blaise Zabini was looking at
Harry with a calculating, intrigued expression.
Professor Quirrell bowed. “Thank you, Harry Potter,” he said, still
with that broad smile. He turned to the class. “Now, believe it or not, we
still have half an hour left in this session, and that is enough to introduce
the Simple Shield. Mr. Potter, of course, is going oﬀ and taking a wellearned rest.”
*

327 *

**
*

CHAPTER NINETEEN

*
*

*

“I can—”
“Idiot,” Professor Quirrell said fondly. The class was already laughing. “Your classmates can teach you afterward, or I’ll tutor you privately
if that’s what it takes. But right now, you’re going through the third door
from the left in the back of the stage, where you will ﬁnd a bed, an assortment of exceptionally tasty snacks, and some extremely light reading
from the Hogwarts library. You may not take anything else with you,
particularly not your textbooks. Now go.”
Harry went.

*

328 *

CHAPTER

TWENT Y

BAYES’S THEOREM
arry stared up at the gray ceiling of the small room, from where he
lay on the portable yet soft bed that had been placed there. He’d
eaten quite a lot of Professor Quirrell’s snacks—intricate confections of
chocolate and other substances, dusted with sparkling sprinkles and jeweled with tiny sugar gems, looking highly expensive and proving, in fact,
to be quite tasty. Harry hadn’t felt the least bit guilty about it either,
this he had earned.
He hadn’t tried to sleep. Harry had a feeling that he wouldn’t like
what happened when he closed his eyes.
He hadn’t tried to read. He wouldn’t have been able to focus.
Funny how Harry’s brain just seemed to keep on running and running, never shutting down no matter how tired it got. It got stupider
but it refused to switch oﬀ.
But there was, there really and truly was a feeling of triumph.
Anti-Dark-Lord-Harry program, +1 point didn’t begin to cover it.
Harry wondered what the Sorting Hat would say now, if he could put
it on his head.
No wonder Professor Quirrell had accused Harry of heading down
the path of a Dark Lord. Harry had been too slow on the uptake, he
should have seen the parallel right away—
Understand that the Dark Lord did not win that day. His goal was to
learn martial arts, and yet he left without a single lesson.
Harry had entered the Potions class with the intent to learn Potions.
He’d left without a single lesson.

H

*

329 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y

*
*

*

And Professor Quirrell had heard, and understood with frightening
precision, and reached out and yanked Harry oﬀ that path, the path that
led to his becoming a copy of You-Know-Who.
There was a knock at the door. “Classes are over,” said Professor
Quirrell’s quiet voice.
Harry approached the door and found himself suddenly nervous.
Then the tension diminished as he heard Professor Quirrell’s footsteps
moving away from the door.
What on Earth is that about? Is it what’s going to get him ﬁred eventually?
Harry opened the door, and saw that Professor Quirrell was now
waiting several bodylengths away.
Does Professor Quirrell feel it too?
They walked across the now-deserted stage to Professor Quirrell’s
desk, which Professor Quirrell leaned on; and Harry, as before, stopped
short of the dais.
“So,” Professor Quirrell said. There was a friendly sense about him
somehow, even though his face still kept its usual seriousness. “What
was it you wanted to talk to me about, Mr. Potter?”
I have a mysterious dark side. But Harry couldn’t just blurt it out like
that.
“Professor Quirrell,” Harry said, “am I oﬀ the path to becoming a
Dark Lord, now?”
Professor Quirrell looked at Harry. “Mr. Potter,” he said solemnly,
with only a slight grin, “a word of advice. There is such a thing as a performance which is too perfect. Real people who have just been beaten
and humiliated for ﬁfteen minutes do not stand up and graciously forgive their enemies. It is the sort of thing you do when you’re trying to
convince everyone you’re not Dark, not—”
“I can’t believe this! You can’t have every possible observation conﬁrm
your theory!”
“And that was a triﬂe too much indignation.”
“What on Earth do I have to do to convince you?”
“To convince me that you harbor no ambitions of becoming a Dark
Lord?” said Professor Quirrell, now looking outright amused. “I sup*

330 *

**
*

BAYES’S THEOREM

*
*

*

pose you could just raise your right hand.”
“What?” Harry said blankly. “But I can raise my right hand whether
or not I—” Harry stopped, feeling rather stupid.
“Indeed,” said Professor Quirrell. “You can just as easily do it either
way. There is nothing you can do to convince me because I would know
that was exactly what you were trying to do. And if we are to be even
more precise, then while I suppose it is barely possible that perfectly
good people exist even though I have never met one, it is nonetheless
improbable that someone would be beaten for ﬁfteen minutes and then
stand up and feel a great surge of kindly forgiveness for his attackers. On
the other hand it is less improbable that a young child would imagine this
as the role to play in order to convince his teacher and classmates that he
is not the next Dark Lord. The import of an act lies not in what that
act resembles on the surface, Mr. Potter, but in the states of mind which
make that act more or less probable.”
Harry blinked. He’d just had the dichotomy between the representativeness heuristic and the Bayesian deﬁnition of evidence explained to
him by a wizard.
“But then again,” said Professor Quirrell, “anyone can want to impress their friends. That need not be Dark. So without it being any
kind of admission, Mr. Potter, tell me honestly. What thought was in
your mind at the moment when you forbade any vengeance? Was that
thought a true impulse to forgiveness? Or was it an awareness of how
your classmates would see the act?”
Sometimes we make our own phoenix song.
But Harry didn’t say it out loud. It was clear that Professor Quirrell
wouldn’t believe him, and would probably respect him less for trying to
utter such a transparent lie.
After a few moments of silence, Professor Quirrell smiled with satisfaction. “Believe it or not, Mr. Potter,” said the professor, “you need not
fear me for having discovered your secret. I am not going to tell you to
give up on becoming the next Dark Lord. If I could turn back the hands
of time and somehow remove that ambition from the mind of my child
self, the self of this present time would not beneﬁt from the alteration.
For as long as I thought that was my goal, it drove me to study and learn
*

331

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y

*
*

*

and reﬁne myself and become stronger. We become what we are meant
to be by following our desires wherever they lead. That is the insight of
Salazar. Ask me to show you to the library section which holds those
same books I read as a thirteen-year-old, and I will happily lead the way.”
“For the love of crap,” Harry said, and sat down on the hard marble
ﬂoor, and then lay back on the ﬂoor, staring up at the distant arches
of the ceiling. It was as close as he could come to collapsing in despair
without hurting himself.
“Still too much indignation,” observed Professor Quirrell. Harry
wasn’t looking but he could hear the suppressed laughter in the voice.
Then Harry realized.
“Actually, I think I know what’s confusing you here,” Harry said.
“That was what I wanted to talk to you about, in fact. Professor Quirrell,
I think that what you’re seeing is my mysterious dark side.”
There was a pause.
“Your... dark side...”
Harry sat up. Professor Quirrell was regarding him with one of the
strangest expressions Harry had seen on anyone’s face, let alone anyone
as digniﬁed as Professor Quirrell.
“It happens when I get angry,” Harry explained. “My blood runs
cold, everything gets cold, everything seems perfectly clear... In retrospect it’s been with me for a while—in my ﬁrst year of Muggle school,
someone tried to take away my ball during recess and I held it behind
my back and kicked him in the solar plexus which I’d read was a weak
point, and the other kids didn’t bother me after that. And I bit a math
teacher when she wouldn’t accept my dominance. But it’s only just recently that I’ve been under enough stress to notice that it’s an actual, you
know, mysterious dark side, and not just an anger management problem
like the school psychologist said. And I don’t have any super magical
powers when it happens, that was one of the ﬁrst things I checked.”
Professor Quirrell rubbed his nose. “Let me think about this,” he
said.
Harry waited in silence for a full minute. He used that time to stand
up, which was more diﬃcult than he had expected.
“Well,” Professor Quirrell said after a while. “I suppose there was
*

332 *

**
*

BAYES’S THEOREM

*
*

*

something you could say that would convince me.”
“I have already guessed that my dark side is really just another part
of me and that the answer isn’t to never become angry but to learn to
stay in control by accepting it, I’m not dumb or anything and I’ve seen
this story enough times to know where it’s going, but it’s hard and you
seem like the person to help me.”
“Well... yes... very perspicacious of you, Mr. Potter, I must say... that
side of you is, as you seem to have already surmised, your intent to kill,
which as you say is a part of you...”
“And needs to be trained,” Harry said, completing the pattern.
“And needs to be trained, yes.” That strange expression was still on
Professor Quirrell’s face. “Mr. Potter, if you truly do not wish to be the
next Dark Lord, then what was the ambition which the Sorting Hat tried
to convince you to abandon, the ambition for which you were Sorted
into Slytherin?”
“I was Sorted into Ravenclaw!”
“Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell, now with a much more usuallooking dry smile, “I know you are accustomed to everyone around you
being a fool, but please do not mistake me for one of them. The likelihood that the Sorting Hat would play its ﬁrst prank in eight hundred
years while it was upon your head is so small as to not be worth considering. I suppose it is barely possible that you snapped your ﬁngers and
invented some simple and clever way to defeat the anti-tampering spells
upon the Hat, though I myself can think of no such method. But by far
the most probable explanation is that Dumbledore decided he was not
happy with the Hat’s choice for the Boy-Who-Lived. This is evident to
anyone with the tiniest smidgin of common sense, so your secret is safe
at Hogwarts.”
Harry opened his mouth, then closed it again with a feeling of complete helplessness. Professor Quirrell was wrong, but wrong in such
a convincing way that Harry was starting to think that it simply was
the rational judgment given the evidence available to Professor Quirrell.
There were times, never predictable times but still sometimes, when you
would get improbable evidence and the best knowable guess would be
wrong. If you had a medical test that was only wrong one time in a
*

333 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y

*
*

*

thousand, sometimes it would still be wrong anyway.
“Can I ask you never to repeat what I’m about to say?” said Harry.
“Absolutely,” said Professor Quirrell. “Consider me asked.”
Harry wasn’t a fool either. “Can I consider you to have said yes?”
“Very good, Mr. Potter. You may indeed so consider.”
“Professor Quirrell—”
“I won’t repeat what you’re about to say,” Professor Quirrell said,
smiling.
They both laughed, then Harry turned serious again. “The Sorting
Hat did seem to think I was going to end up as a Dark Lord unless I went
to Huﬄepuﬀ,” Harry said. “But I don’t want to be one.”
“Mr. Potter...” said Professor Quirrell. “Don’t take this the wrong
way. I promise you will not be graded on the answer. I only want to
know your own, honest reply. Why not?”
Harry had that helpless feeling again. Thou shalt not become a Dark
Lord was such an obvious theorem in his moral system that it was hard
to describe the actual proof steps. “Um, people would get hurt?”
“Surely you’ve wanted to hurt people,” said Professor Quirrell. “You
wanted to hurt those bullies today. Being a Dark Lord doesn’t mean that
people you like get hurt. It means that people you want to hurt get hurt.”
Harry ﬂoundered for words and then decided to simply go with the
obvious. “First of all, just because I want to hurt someone doesn’t mean
it’s right—”
“What makes something right, if not your wanting it?”
“Ah,” Harry said, “preference utilitarianism.”
“Pardon me?” said Professor Quirrell.
“It’s the ethical theory that the good is what satisﬁes the preferences
of the most people—”
“No,” Professor Quirrell said. His ﬁngers rubbed the bridge of his
nose. “I don’t think that’s quite what I was trying to say. Mr. Potter,
in the end people all do what they want to do. Sometimes people give
names like ‘right’ to things they want to do, but how could we possibly
act on anything but our own desires?”
“Well, obviously,” Harry said. “I couldn’t act on moral considerations if they lacked the power to move me. But that doesn’t mean my
*

334 *

**
*

BAYES’S THEOREM

*
*

*

wanting to hurt those Slytherins has the power to move me more than
moral considerations!”
Professor Quirrell blinked.
“Not to mention,” Harry said, “being a Dark Lord would mean that
a lot of innocent bystanders got hurt too!”
“Why does that matter to you?” Professor Quirrell said. “What have
they done for you?”
Harry laughed. “Oh, now that was around as subtle as Atlas
Shrugged.”
“Pardon me?” Professor Quirrell said again.
“It’s a book that my parents wouldn’t let me read because they
thought it would corrupt me, so of course I read it anyway and I was
oﬀended they thought I would fall for any traps that obvious. Blah blah
blah, appeal to my sense of superiority, other people are trying to keep
me down, blah blah blah.”
“So you’re saying I need to make my traps less obvious?” said Professor Quirrell. He tapped a ﬁnger on his cheek, looking thoughtful. “I
can work on that.”
They both laughed.
“But to stay with the current question,” said Professor Quirrell,
“what have all these other people done for you?”
“Other people have done huge amounts for me!” Harry said. “My
parents took me in when my parents died because they were good people,
and to become a Dark Lord is to betray that!”
Professor Quirrell was silent for a time.
“I confess,” said Professor Quirrell quietly, “when I was your age,
that thought could not ever have come to me.”
“I’m sorry,” Harry said.
“Don’t be,” said Professor Quirrell. “It was long ago, and I resolved
my parental issues to my own satisfaction. So you are held back by the
thought of your parents’ disapproval? Does that mean that if they died
in an accident, there would be nothing left to stop you from—”
“No,” Harry said. “Just no. It is their impulse to kindness which
sheltered me. That impulse is not only in my parents. And that impulse
is what would be betrayed.”
*

335 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y

*
*

*

“In any case, Mr. Potter, you have not answered my original question,” said Professor Quirrell ﬁnally. “What is your ambition?”
“Oh,” said Harry. “Um..” He organized his thoughts. “To understand everything important there is to know about the universe, apply
that knowledge to become omnipotent, and use that power to rewrite
reality because I have some objections to the way it works now.”
There was a slight pause.
“Forgive me if this is a stupid question, Mr. Potter,” said Professor
Quirrell, “but are you sure you did not just confess to wanting to be a
Dark Lord?”
“That’s only if you use your power for evil,” explained Harry. “If
you use the power for good, you’re a Light Lord.”
“I see,” Professor Quirrell said. He tapped his other cheek with a ﬁnger. “I suppose I can work with that. But Mr. Potter, while the scope of
your ambition is worthy of Salazar himself, how exactly do you propose
to go about it? Is step one to become a great ﬁghting wizard, or Head
Unspeakable, or Minister of Magic, or—”
“Step one is to become a scientist.”
Professor Quirrell was looking at Harry as if he’d just turned into a
cat.
“A scientist,” Professor Quirrell said after a while.
Harry nodded.
“A scientist?” repeated Professor Quirrell.
“Yes,” Harry said. “I shall achieve my objectives through the power...
of Science!”
“A scientist!” said Professor Quirrell. There was genuine indignation
on his face, and his voice had grown stronger and sharper. “You could
be the best of all my students! The greatest ﬁghting wizard to come out
of Hogwarts in ﬁve decades! I cannot picture you wasting your days in
a white lab coat doing pointless things to rats!”
“Hey!” said Harry. “There’s more to science than that! Not that
there’s anything wrong with experimenting on rats, of course. But science is how you go about understanding and controlling the universe—”
“Fool,” said Professor Quirrell, in a voice of quiet, bitter intensity.
“You’re a fool, Harry Potter.” He passed a hand over his face, and when
*

336 *

**
*

BAYES’S THEOREM

*
*

*

that hand had passed, his face was calmer. “Or more likely you have not
yet found your true ambition. May I strongly recommend that you try
to become a Dark Lord instead? I will do anything I can to help as a
matter of public service.”
“You don’t like science,” Harry said slowly. “Why not?”
“Those fool Muggles will kill us all someday!” Professor Quirrell’s
voice had grown louder. “They will end it! End all of it!”
Harry was feeling a bit lost here. “What are we talking about here,
nuclear weapons?”
“Yes, nuclear weapons!” Professor Quirrell was almost shouting now.
“Even He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named never used those, perhaps because
he didn’t want to rule over a heap of ash! They never should have been
made! And it will only get worse with time!” Professor Quirrell was
standing up straight instead of leaning on his desk. “There are gates you
do not open, there are seals you do not breach! The fools who can’t
resist meddling are killed by the lesser perils early on, and the survivors
all know that there are secrets you do not share with anyone who lacks
the intelligence and the discipline to discover them for themselves! Every powerful wizard knows that! Even the most terrible Dark Wizards
know that! And those idiot Muggles can’t seem to ﬁgure it out! The eager little fools who discovered the secret of nuclear weapons didn’t keep
it to themselves, they told their fool politicians and now we must live
under the constant threat of annihilation!”
This was a rather diﬀerent way of looking at things than Harry had
grown up with. It had never occurred to him that nuclear physicists
should have formed a conspiracy of silence to keep the secret of nuclear
weapons from anyone not smart enough to be a nuclear physicist. The
thought was intriguing, if nothing else. Would they have had secret passwords? Would they have had masks?
(Actually, for all Harry knew, there were all sorts of incredibly destructive secrets which physicists kept to themselves, and the secret of
nuclear weapons was the only one that had escaped into the wild. The
world would look the same to him either way.)
“I’ll have to think about that,” Harry said to Professor Quirrell. “It’s
a new idea to me. And one of the hidden secrets of science, passed down
*

337 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y

*
*

*

from a few rare teachers to their grad students, is how to avoid ﬂushing
new ideas down the toilet the instant you hear one you don’t like.”
Professor Quirrell blinked again.
“Is there any sort of science you do approve of?” said Harry. “Medicine, maybe?”
“Space travel,” said Professor Quirrell. “But the Muggles seem to be
dragging their feet on the one project which might have let wizardkind
escape this planet before they blow it up.”
Harry nodded. “I’m a big fan of the space program too. At least we
have that much in common.”
Professor Quirrell looked at Harry. Something ﬂickered in the professor’s eyes. “I will have your word, your promise and your oath never
to speak of what follows.”
“You have it,” Harry said immediately.
“See to it that you keep your oath or you will not like the results,”
said Professor Quirrell. “I will now cast a rare and powerful spell, not
on you, but on the classroom around us. Stand still, so that you do not
touch the boundaries of the spell once it has been cast. You must not
interact with the magic which I am maintaining. Look only. Otherwise
I will end the spell.” Professor Quirrell paused. “And try not to fall
over.”
Harry nodded, puzzled and anticipatory.
Professor Quirrell raised his wand and said something that Harry’s
ears and mind couldn’t grasp at all, words that bypassed awareness and
vanished into oblivion.
The marble in a short radius around Harry’s feet stayed constant. All
the other marble of the ﬂoor vanished, the walls and ceilings vanished.
Harry stood on a small circle of white marble in the midst of an
endless ﬁeld of stars, burning terribly bright and unwavering. There was
no Earth, no Moon, no Sun that Harry recognized. Professor Quirrell
stood in the same place as before, ﬂoating in the midst of the starﬁeld.
The Milky Way was already visible as a great wash of light and it grew
brighter as Harry’s vision adjusted to the darkness.
The sight wrenched at Harry’s heart like nothing he had ever seen.
“Are we... in space...?”
*

338 *

**
*

BAYES’S THEOREM

*
*

*

“No,” said Professor Quirrell. His voice was sad, and reverent. “But
it is a true image.”
Tears came into Harry’s eyes. He wiped them away frantically, he
would not miss this for some stupid water blurring his vision.
The stars were no longer tiny jewels set in a giant velvet dome, as
they were in the night sky of Earth. Here there was no sky above, no
surrounding sphere. Only points of perfect light against perfect blackness, an inﬁnite and empty void with countless tiny holes through which
shone the brilliance from some unimaginable realm beyond.
In space, the stars looked terribly, terribly, terribly far away.
Harry kept on wiping his eyes, over and over.
“Sometimes,” Professor Quirrell said in a voice so quiet it almost
wasn’t there, “when this ﬂawed world seems unusually hateful, I wonder
whether there might be some other place, far away, where I should have
been. I cannot seem to imagine what that place might be, and if I can’t
even imagine it then how can I believe it exists? And yet the universe is
so very, very wide, and perhaps it might exist anyway? But the stars are
so very, very far away. It would take a long, long time to get there, even
if I knew the way. And I wonder what I would dream about, if I slept
for a long, long time...”
Though it felt like sacrilege, Harry managed a whisper. “Please let
me stay here awhile.”
Professor Quirrell nodded, where he stood unsupported against the
stars.
It was easy to forget the small circle of marble on which you stood,
and your own body, and become a point of awareness which might have
been still, or might have been moving. With all distances incalculable
there was no way to tell.
There was a time of no time.
And then the stars vanished, and the classroom returned.
“I’m sorry,” said Professor Quirrell, “but we’re about to have company.”
“It’s ﬁne,” Harry whispered. “It was enough.” He would never forget
this day, and not because of the unimportant things that had happened
earlier. He would learn how to cast that spell if it was the last thing he
*

339 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y

*
*

*

ever learned.
Then the heavy oaken doors of the classroom blasted oﬀ their hinges
and skittered across the marble ﬂoor with a high-pitched shriek.
“Quirinus! How dare you!”
Like a vast thundercloud, an ancient and powerful wizard blew into
the room, a look of such incandescent rage upon his face that the stern
look he had earlier turned upon Harry seemed like nothing.
There was a wrench of disorientation in Harry’s mind as the part
that wanted to run away screaming from the scariest thing it had ever
seen ran away, rotating into place a part of him which could take the
shock.
None of Harry’s facets were happy about having their star-gazing
interrupted. “Headmaster Albus Percival—” Harry started to say in icy
tones.
Wham. Professor Quirrell’s hand came down hard upon his desk.
“Mr. Potter!” barked Professor Quirrell. “This is the Headmaster of Hogwarts and you are a mere student! You will address him appropriately!”
Harry looked at Professor Quirrell.
Professor Quirrell was giving Harry a stern glare.
Neither of them smiled.
Dumbledore’s long strides had come to a halt before where Harry
stood in front of the dais and Professor Quirrell stood by his desk. The
Headmaster stared in shock at both of them.
“I’m sorry,” Harry said in meekly polite tones. “Headmaster, thank
you for wanting to protect me, but Professor Quirrell did the right
thing.”
Slowly, Dumbledore’s expression changed from something that
would vaporize steel into something merely angry. “I heard students
saying that this man had you abused by older Slytherins! That he forbade you to defend yourself!”
Harry nodded. “He knew exactly what was wrong with me and he
showed me how to ﬁx it.”
“Harry, what are you talking about?”
“I was teaching him how to lose,” Professor Quirrell said dryly. “It’s
an important life skill.”
*

340 *

**
*

BAYES’S THEOREM

*
*

*

It was apparent that Dumbledore still didn’t understand, but his
voice had lowered in register. “Harry...” he said slowly. “If there’s any
threat the Defense Professor has oﬀered you to prevent you from complaining—”
You lunatic, after today of all days do you really think I—
“Headmaster,” Harry said, trying to look abashed, “what’s wrong
with me isn’t that I keep quiet about abusive professors.”
Professor Quirrell chuckled. “Not perfect, Mr. Potter, but good
enough for your ﬁrst day. Headmaster, did you stay long enough to
hear about the ﬁfty-one points for Ravenclaw, or did you storm out as
soon as you heard the ﬁrst part?”
A brief look of disconcertment crossed Dumbledore’s face, followed
by surprise. “Fifty-one points for Ravenclaw?”
Professor Quirrell nodded. “He wasn’t expecting them, but it
seemed appropriate. Tell Professor McGonagall that I think the story of
what Mr. Potter went through to earn back the lost points will do just
as well to make her point. No, Headmaster, Mr. Potter didn’t tell me
anything. It’s easy to see which part of today’s events are her work, just
as I know that the ﬁnal compromise was your own suggestion. Though
I wonder how on Earth Mr. Potter was able to gain the upper hand over
both Snape and you and then Professor McGonagall was able to gain the
upper hand over him.”
Somehow Harry managed to control his face. Was it that obvious to
a real Slytherin?
Dumbledore came closer to Harry, scrutinizing. “Your color looks a
little oﬀ, Harry,” the old wizard said. He peered closely at Harry’s face.
“What did you have for lunch today?”
“What?” Harry said, his mind wobbling in sudden confusion. Why
would Dumbledore be asking about deep-fried lamb and thin-sliced broccoli when that was just about the last probable cause of—
The old wizard straightened up. “Never mind, then. I think you’re
ﬁne.”
Professor Quirrell coughed, loudly and deliberately. Harry looked
at the professor, and saw that Professor Quirrell was staring sharply at
Dumbledore.
*

341

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y

*
*

*

“Ah-hem!” Professor Quirrell said again.
Dumbledore and Professor Quirrell locked eyes, and something
seemed to pass between them.
“If you don’t tell him,” Professor Quirrell said then, “I will, even if
you ﬁre me for it.”
Dumbledore sighed and turned back to Harry. “I apologize for invading your mental privacy, Mr. Potter,” the Headmaster said formally.
“I had no purpose except to determine if Professor Quirrell had done
the same.”
What?
The confusion lasted just exactly as long as it took Harry to understand what had just happened.
“You—!”
“Gently, Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell. His face was hard,
however, as he stared at Dumbledore.
“Legilimency is sometimes mistaken for common sense,” said the
Headmaster. “But it leaves traces which another skillful Legilimens can
detect. That was all I looked for, Mr. Potter, and I asked you an irrelevant
question to ensure you wouldn’t think about anything important while
I looked.”
“You should have asked ﬁrst!”
Professor Quirrell shook his head. “No, Mr. Potter, the Headmaster
had some justiﬁcation for his concerns, and had he asked for permission you would have thought of exactly those things you did not wish
him to see.” Professor Quirrell’s voice grew sharper. “I am rather more
concerned, Headmaster, that you saw no need to tell him afterward!”
“You have now made it more diﬃcult to conﬁrm his mental privacy
on future occasions,” Dumbledore said. He favored Professor Quirrell
with a cold look. “Was that your intention, I wonder?”
Professor Quirrell’s expression was implacable. “There are too many
Legilimens in this school. I insist that Mr. Potter receive instruction in
Occlumency. Will you permit me to be his tutor?”
“Absolutely not,” Dumbledore said at once.
“I did not think so. Then since you have deprived him of my free
services, you will pay for Mr. Potter’s tutoring by a licensed Occlumency
*

342 *

**
*

BAYES’S THEOREM

*
*

*

instructor.”
“Such services do not come cheaply,” Dumbledore said, looking at
Professor Quirrell in some surprise. “Although I do have certain connections—”
Professor Quirrell shook his head ﬁrmly. “No. Mr. Potter will ask
his account manager at Gringotts to recommend a neutral instructor.
With respect, Headmaster Dumbledore, after the events of this morning
I must protest you or your friends having access to Mr. Potter’s mind.
I must also insist that the instructor have taken an Unbreakable Vow
to reveal nothing, and that he agree to be Obliviated of each session
immediately afterward.”
Dumbledore was frowning. “Such services are extremely expensive,
as you well know, and I cannot help but wonder why you deem them
necessary.”
“If it’s money that’s the problem,” Harry spoke up, “I have some
ideas for making large amounts of money quickly—”
“Thank you Quirinus, your wisdom is now quite evident and I am
sorry for disputing it. Your concern for Harry Potter does you credit,
as well.”
“You’re welcome,” said Professor Quirrell. “I hope you will not object if I go on making him a particular focus of my attentions.” Professor
Quirrell’s face was now very serious, and very still.
Dumbledore looked at Harry.
“It is my own wish also,” Harry said.
“So that’s how it is to be...” the old wizard said slowly. Something
strange passed across his face. “Harry... you must realize that if you
choose this man as your teacher and your friend, your ﬁrst mentor, then
one way or another you will lose him, and the manner in which you lose
him may or may not allow you to ever get him back.”
That hadn’t occurred to Harry. But there was that jinx on the Defense position... one which had apparently worked with perfect regularity for decades...
“Probably,” said Professor Quirrell quietly, “but he will have the full
use of me while I last.”
Dumbledore sighed. “I suppose it is economical, at least, since as the
*

343 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y

*
*

*

Defense Professor you’re already doomed in some unknown fashion.”
Harry had to work hard to suppress his expression as he realized
what Dumbledore had actually been implying.
“I will inform Madam Pince that Mr. Potter is allowed to obtain
books on Occlumency,” said Dumbledore.
“There is preliminary training which you must do on your own,”
said Professor Quirrell to Harry. “And I do suggest that you hurry up
on it.”
Harry nodded.
“I’ll take my leave of you then,” said Dumbledore. He nodded to
both Harry and Professor Quirrell, and departed, walking a bit slowly.
“Can you cast the spell again?” Harry said the moment Dumbledore
was gone.
“Not today,” said Professor Quirrell quietly, “and not tomorrow either, I’m afraid. It takes a lot out of me to cast, though less to keep going,
and so I usually prefer to maintain it as long as possible. This time I cast
it on impulse. Had I thought, and realized we might be interrupted—”
Dumbledore was now Harry’s least favorite person in the entire
world.
They both sighed.
“Even if I only ever see it once,” Harry said, “I will never stop being
grateful to you.”
Professor Quirrell nodded.
“Have you heard of the Pioneer program?” Harry said. “They were
probes that would ﬂy by diﬀerent planets and take pictures. Two of the
probes would end up on trajectories that took them out of the Solar
System and into interstellar space. So they put a golden plaque on the
probes, with a picture of a man, and a woman, and showing where to
ﬁnd our Sun in the galaxy.”
Professor Quirrell was silent for a moment, then smiled. “Tell me,
Mr. Potter, can you guess what thought went through my mind when I
ﬁnished assembling the thirty-seven items on the list of things I would
never do as a Dark Lord? Put yourself in my shoes—imagine yourself in
my place—and guess.”
Harry imagined himself looking over a list of thirty-seven things not
*

344 *

**
*

BAYES’S THEOREM

*
*

*

to do once he became a Dark Lord.
“You decided that if you had to follow the whole list all the time, there
wouldn’t be much point in becoming a Dark Lord in the ﬁrst place,”
Harry said.
“Precisely,” said Professor Quirrell. He was grinning. “So I am going
to violate rule two—which was simply ‘don’t brag’—and tell you about
something I have done. I don’t see how the knowledge could do any
harm. And I strongly suspect you would have ﬁgured it out anyway,
once we knew each other well enough. Nonetheless... I shall have your
oath never to speak of what I am about to tell.”
“You have it!” Harry had a feeling this was going to be really good.
“I subscribe to a Muggle bulletin which keeps me informed of
progress on space travel. I didn’t hear about Pioneer 10 until they reported its launch. But when I discovered that Pioneer 11 would also be
leaving the Solar System forever,” Professor Quirrell said, his grin the
widest that Harry had yet seen from him, “I snuck into nasa, I did, and
I cast a lovely little spell on that lovely golden plaque which will make
it last a lot longer than it otherwise would.”
...
...
...
“Yes,” Professor Quirrell said, who now seemed to be standing
around ﬁfty feet taller, “I thought that was how you might react.”
...
...
...
“Mr. Potter?”
“...I can’t think of anything to say.”
“‘You win’ seems appropriate,” said Professor Quirrell.
“You win,” Harry said immediately.
“See?” said Professor Quirrell. “We can only imagine what giant heap
of trouble you would have gotten into if you had been unable to say
that.”
They both laughed.
A further thought occurred to Harry. “You didn’t add any extra
*

345 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y

*
*

*

information to the plaque, did you?”
“Extra information?” said Professor Quirrell, sounding as if the idea
had never occurred to him before and he was quite intrigued.
Which made Harry rather suspicious, considering that it’d taken less
than a minute for Harry to think of it.
“Maybe you included a holographic message like in Star Wars?” said
Harry. “Or... hm. A portrait seems to store a whole human brain’s
worth of information... you couldn’t have added any extra mass to the
probe, but maybe you could’ve turned an existing part into a portrait
of yourself? Or you found a volunteer dying of a terminal illness, snuck
them into nasa, and cast a spell to make sure their ghost ended up in the
plaque—”
“Mr. Potter,” Professor Quirrell said, his voice suddenly sharp, “a
spell requiring a human death would certainly be classiﬁed by the Ministry as Dark Arts, regardless of circumstances. Students should not be
heard talking about such things.”
And the amazing thing about the way Professor Quirrell said it was
how perfectly it maintained plausible deniability. It had been said in
exactly the appropriate tone for someone who wasn’t willing to discuss
such things and thought students should steer away from them. Harry
honestly didn’t know whether Professor Quirrell was just waiting to talk
about it until after Harry had learned to protect his mind.
“Got it,” Harry said. “I won’t talk with anyone else about that idea.”
“Please be discreet about the whole matter, Mr. Potter,” Professor
Quirrell said. “I prefer to go through my life without attracting public
notice. You will ﬁnd nothing in the newspapers about Quirinus Quirrell
until I decided it was time for me to teach Defense at Hogwarts.”
That seemed a little sad, but Harry understood. Then Harry realized
the implications. “So just how much awesome stuﬀ have you done that
no one else knows about—”
“Oh, some,” said Professor Quirrell. “But I think that’s quite enough
for today, Mr. Potter, I confess I am feeling a bit tired—”
“I understand. And thank you. For everything.”
Professor Quirrell nodded, but he was leaning harder on his desk.
Harry quickly took his leave.
*

346 *

CHAPTER

TWENT Y-ONE

RATIONALIZATION
ermione Granger had worried she was turning Bad.
The diﬀerence between Good and Bad was usually easy to grasp,
she’d never understood why other people had so much trouble. At Hogwarts, “Good” was Professor Flitwick and Professor McGonagall and
Professor Sprout. “Bad” was Professor Snape and Professor Quirrell and
Draco Malfoy. Harry Potter... was one of those unusual cases where you
couldn’t tell just by looking. She was still trying to ﬁgure out where he
belonged.
But when it came to herself...
Hermione was having too much fun crushing Harry Potter.
She’d done better than him in every single class they’d taken. (Except
for broomstick riding which was like gym class, it didn’t count.) She’d
gotten real House points almost every day of their ﬁrst week, not for
weird heroic things, but smart things like learning spells quickly and
helping other students. She knew those kinds of House points were
better, and the best part was, Harry Potter knew it too. She could see it
in his eyes every time she won another real House point.
If you were Good, you weren’t supposed to enjoy winning this much.
It had started on the day of the train ride, though it had taken a
while for the whirlwind to sink in. It wasn’t until later that night that
Hermione had begun to realize just how much she’d let that boy walk all
over her.
Before she’d met Harry Potter she hadn’t had anyone she’d wanted
to crush. If someone wasn’t doing as well as her in class, it was her job
to help them, not rub it in. That was what it meant to be Good.

H

*

347 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

And now...
...now she was winning, Harry Potter was ﬂinching every time she
got another House point, and it was so much fun, her parents had warned
her against drugs and she suspected this was more fun than that.
She’d always liked the smiles that teachers gave her when she did
something right. She’d always liked seeing the long row of check-marks
on a perfectly answered test. But now when she did well in class she
would casually glance around and catch a glimpse of Harry Potter gritting his teeth, and it made her want to burst into song like a Disney
movie.
That was Bad, wasn’t it?
Hermione had worried she was turning Bad.
And then a thought had come to her which wiped away all her fears.
She and Harry were getting into a Romance! Of course! Everyone
knew what it meant when a boy and a girl started ﬁghting all the time.
They were courting one another! There was nothing Bad about that.
It couldn’t be that she just enjoyed beating the living scholastic daylights out of the most famous student in the school, someone who was
in books and talked like books, the boy who had somehow vanquished
the Dark Lord and even smushed Professor Snape like a sad little bug,
the boy who was, as Professor Quirrell would have put it, dominant,
over everyone else in ﬁrst-year Ravenclaw except for Hermione Granger
who was utterly squishing the Boy-Who-Lived in all his classes besides
broomstick riding.
Because that would have been Bad.
No. It was Romance. That was it. That was why they were ﬁghting.
Hermione was glad she had ﬁgured this out in time for today, when
Harry would lose their book-reading contest, which the whole school
knew about, and she wanted to start dancing with the sheer overﬂowing
joy of it.
It was 2:45pm on Saturday and Harry Potter had half of Bathilda
Bagshot’s A History of Magic left to read and she was staring at her pocket
watch as it ticked with dreadful slowness toward 2:47pm.
And the entire Ravenclaw common room was watching.
It wasn’t just the ﬁrst-years, news had spread like spilled milk and
*

348 *

**
*

RATIONALIZATION

*
*

*

fully half of Ravenclaw was crowded into the room, squeezed into sofas
and leaning on bookcases and sitting on the arms of chairs. All six prefects were there including the Head Girl of Hogwarts. Someone had
needed to cast an Air-Freshening Charm just so that there would be
enough oxygen. And the din of conversation had died into whispers
which had now faded into utter silence.
2:46pm.
The tension was unbearable. If it had been anyone else, anyone else,
his defeat would have been a foregone conclusion.
But this was Harry Potter, and you couldn’t rule out the possibility
that he would, sometime in the next few seconds, raise a hand and snap
his ﬁngers.
With sudden terror she realized how Harry Potter might be able to
do exactly that. It would be just like him to have already ﬁnished reading
the second half of the book earlier...
Hermione’s vision began to swim. She tried to make herself breathe,
and found that she simply couldn’t.
Ten seconds left, and he still hadn’t raised his hand.
Five seconds left.
2:47pm.
Harry Potter carefully placed a bookmark into his book, closed it,
and laid it aside.
“I would like to note for the beneﬁt of posterity,” said the Boy-WhoLived in a clear voice, “that I had only half a book left, and that I ran
into a number of unexpected delays—”
“You lost!” shrieked Hermione. “You did! You lost our contest!”
There was a collective exhalation as everyone started breathing again.
Harry Potter shot her a Look of Flaming Fire, but she was ﬂoating
in a halo of pure white happiness and nothing could touch her.
“Do you realize what kind of week I’ve had?” said Harry Potter. “Any
lesser being would have been hard-pressed to read eight Dr. Seuss books!”
“You set the time limit.”
Harry’s Look of Flaming Fire grew even hotter. “I did not have any
logical way of knowing I’d have to save the entire school from Professor
Snape, or get beaten up in Defense class, and if I told you how I lost all
*

349 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

the time between 5pm and dinner on Thursday you would think I was
insane—”
“Awww, it sounds like someone fell prey to the planning fallacy.”
Raw shock showed on Harry Potter’s face.
“Oh that reminds me, I ﬁnished reading the ﬁrst batch of books you
lent me,” Hermione said with her best innocent look. A couple of them
had been hard books, too. She wondered how long it had taken him to
ﬁnish reading them.
“Someday,” said the Boy-Who-Lived, “when the distant descendants
of Homo sapiens are looking back over the history of the galaxy and
wondering how it all went so wrong, they will conclude that the original
mistake was when someone taught Hermione Granger how to read.”
“But you still lose,” said Hermione. She held a hand to her chin and
looked contemplative. “Now what exactly should you lose, I wonder?”
“What?”
“You lost the bet,” Hermione explained, “so you have to pay a forfeit.”
“I don’t remember agreeing to this!”
“Really?” said Hermione Granger. She put a thoughtful look on her
face. Then, as if the idea had only just then occurred to her, “We’ll take
a vote, then. Everyone in Ravenclaw who thinks Harry Potter has to
pay up, raise your hand!”
“What?” shrieked Harry Potter again.
He spun around and saw that he was surrounded by a sea of raised
hands.
And if Harry Potter had looked more carefully, he would have noticed
that an awful lot of the onlookers seemed to be girls and that practically
every female in the room had their hand raised.
“Stop!” wailed Harry Potter. “You don’t know what she’s going to
ask! Don’t you realize what she’s doing? She’s getting you to make
an advance commitment now, and then the pressure of consistency will
make you agree with whatever she says afterward!”
“Don’t worry,” said the prefect Penelope Clearwater. “If she asks for
something unreasonable, we can just change our minds. Right, everyone?”
*

350 *

**
*

RATIONALIZATION

*
*

*

And there were eager nods from all the girls whom Penelope Clearwater had told about Hermione’s plan.

**
*
A silent ﬁgure quietly slipped through the chilled halls of the Hogwarts
dungeons. He was to be present in a certain room at 6:00pm to meet a
certain someone, and if at all possible it was best to be early, to show
respect.
But when his hand turned the doorknob and opened the door into
that dark, silent, unused classroom, there was a silhouette already standing there amid the rows of dusty old desks. A silhouette which held a
small green glowing rod, casting a pale light which hardly illuminated
even he who held it, let alone the surrounding room.
The light of the hallway died as the door closed and shut behind him,
and Draco’s eyes began the process of adjusting to the dim glow.
The silhouette slowly turned to behold him, revealing a shadowed
face only partially lit by the eerie green light.
Draco liked this meeting already. Keep the chill green light, make
them both taller, give them hoods and masks, move them from a classroom to a graveyard, and it would be just like the start of half the stories
his father’s friends told about the Death Eaters.
“I want you to know, Draco Malfoy,” said the silhouette in tones of
deadly calm, “that I do not blame you for my recent defeat.”
Draco opened his mouth in unthinking protest, there was no possible
reason why he should be blamed—
“It was due, more than anything else, to my own stupidity,” continued that shadowy ﬁgure. “There were many other things I could have
done, at any step along the way. You did not ask me to do exactly what
I did. You only asked for help. I was the one who unwisely chose that
particular method. But the fact remains that I lost the contest by half a
book. The actions of your pet idiot, and the favor you asked for, and,
yes, my own foolishness in going about it, caused me to lose time. More
time than you know. Time which, in the end, proved critical. The fact
*

351

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

remains, Draco Malfoy, that if you had not asked that favor, I would
have won. And not... instead... lost.”
Draco had already heard about Harry’s loss, and the forfeit Granger
had claimed from him. The news had spread faster than owls could have
carried it.
“I understand,” Draco said. “I’m sorry.” There was nothing else he
could say if he wanted Harry Potter to be friends with him.
“I am not asking for understanding or sorrow,” said the dark silhouette, still with that deadly calm. “But I have just spent two full hours in
the presence of Hermione Granger, dressed in such clothing as was provided me, visiting such fascinating places in Hogwarts as a tiny burbling
waterfall of what looked to me like snot, accompanied by a number of
other girls who insisted on such helpful activities as strewing our path
with Transﬁgured rose petals. I have been on a date, scion of Malfoy.
My ﬁrst date. And when I call that favor due, you will pay it.”
Draco nodded solemnly. Before arriving he had taken the wise precaution of learning every available detail of Harry’s date, so that he could
get all of his hysterical laughing done before their appointed meeting
time, and would not commit a faux pas by giggling continuously until
he lost consciousness.
“Do you think,” Draco said, “that something sad ought to happen to
the Granger girl—”
“Spread the word in Slytherin that the Granger girl is mine and anyone who meddles in my aﬀairs will have their remains scattered over
an area wide enough to include twelve diﬀerent spoken languages. And
since I am not in Gryﬃndor and I use cunning rather than immediate
frontal attacks, they should not panic if I am seen smiling at her.”
“Or if you’re seen on a second date?” Draco said, allowing just a tiny
note of skepticism into his voice.
“There will be no second date,” said the green-lit silhouette in a voice so
fearsome that it sounded, not only like a Death Eater, but like Amycus
Carrow that one time just before Father told him to stop it, he wasn’t
the Dark Lord.
Of course it was still a young boy’s high unbroken voice and when
you combined that with the actual words, well, it just didn’t work. If
*

352 *

**
*

RATIONALIZATION

*
*

*

Harry Potter did become the next Dark Lord someday, Draco would use
a Pensieve to store a copy of this memory somewhere safe, and Harry
Potter would never dare betray him.
“But let us talk of happier matters,” said the green-shadowed ﬁgure.
“Let us talk of knowledge and of power. Draco Malfoy, let us talk of
Science.”
“Yes,” said Draco. “Let us speak.”
Draco wondered how much of his own face could be seen, and how
much was in shadow, in that eerie green light.
And though Draco kept his face serious, there was a smile in his
heart.
He was ﬁnally having a real grownup conversation.
“I oﬀer you power,” said the shadowy ﬁgure, “and I will tell you of
that power and its price. The power comes from knowing the shape of
reality and so gaining control over it. What you understand, you can
command, and that is power enough to walk upon the Moon. The price
of that power is that you must learn to ask questions of Nature, and
far more diﬃcult, accept Nature’s answers. You will do experiments,
perform tests and see what happens. And you must accept the meaning
of those results when they tell you that you are mistaken. You will have
to learn how to lose, not to me, but to Nature. When you ﬁnd yourself
arguing with reality, you will have to let reality win. You will ﬁnd this
painful, Draco Malfoy, and I do not know if you are strong in that way.
Knowing the price, is it still your wish to learn the human power?”
Draco took a deep breath. He’d thought about this. And it was hard
to see how he could answer any other way. He’d been instructed to take
every avenue of friendship with Harry Potter. It was just learning, he
wasn’t promising to do anything. He could always stop the lessons at
any time...
There were certainly any number of things about the situation which
made it look like a trap, but in all honesty, Draco didn’t see how this
could go wrong.
Plus Draco did kind of want to rule the world.
“Yes,” said Draco.
“Excellent,” said the shadowy ﬁgure. “I have had something of a
*

353 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

crowded week, and it will take time to plan your curriculum—”
“I’ve got a lot of things I need to do myself to consolidate my power
in Slytherin,” said Draco, “not to mention homework. Maybe we should
just start in October?”
“Sounds sensible,” said the shadowy ﬁgure, “but what I meant to say
is that to plan your curriculum, I need to know what I will be teaching
you. Three thoughts come to me. The ﬁrst is that I teach you of the
human mind and brain. The second option is that I teach you of the
physical universe, those arts which lie on the pathway to visiting the
Moon. This involves a great deal of numbers, but to a certain kind of
mind those numbers are more beautiful than anything else Science has
to teach. Do you like numbers, Draco?”
Draco shook his head.
“Then so much for that. You will learn your mathematics eventually,
but not right away, I think. The third option is that I teach you of
genetics and evolution and inheritance, what you would call blood—”
“That one,” said Draco.
The ﬁgure nodded. “I thought you might say as much. But I think it
will be the most painful path for you, Draco. What if your family and
friends, the blood purists, say one thing, and you ﬁnd that the experimental test says another?”
“Then I’ll ﬁgure out how to make the experimental test say the right
answer!”
There was a pause, as the shadowy ﬁgure stood there with its mouth
open for a short while.
“Um,” said the shadowy ﬁgure. “It doesn’t really work like that.
That’s what I was trying to warn you about here, Draco. You can’t
make the answer come out to be anything you like.”
“You can always make the answer come out your way,” said Draco.
That had been practically the ﬁrst thing his tutors had taught him. “It’s
just a matter of ﬁnding the right arguments.”
“No,” said the shadowy ﬁgure, voice rising in frustration, “no, no,
no! Then you get the wrong answer and you can’t go to the Moon that
way! Nature isn’t a person, you can’t trick them into believing something else, if you try to tell the Moon it’s made of cheese you can argue
*

354 *

**
*

RATIONALIZATION

*
*

*

for days and it won’t change the Moon! What you’re talking about is rationalization, like starting with a sheet of paper, moving straight down
to the bottom line, using ink to write ‘and therefore, the Moon is made of
cheese’, and then moving back up to write all sorts of clever arguments
above. But either the Moon is made of cheese or it isn’t. The moment
you wrote the bottom line, it was already true or already false. Whether
or not the whole sheet of paper ends up with the right conclusion or the
wrong conclusion is ﬁxed the instant you write down the bottom line.
If you’re trying to pick between two expensive trunks, and you like the
shiny one, it doesn’t matter what clever arguments you come up with
for buying it, the real rule you used to choose which trunk to argue for
was ‘pick the shiny one’, and however eﬀective that rule is at picking
good trunks, that’s the kind of trunk you’ll get. Rationality can’t be
used to argue for a ﬁxed side, its only possible use is deciding which side
to argue. Science isn’t for convincing anyone that the blood purists are
right. That’s politics! The power of science comes from ﬁnding out the
way Nature really is that can’t be changed by arguing! What science can do
is tell us how blood really works, how wizards really inherit their powers from their parents, and whether Muggleborns are really weaker or
stronger—”
“Stronger!” said Draco. He had been trying to follow this, a puzzled
frown on his face, he could see how it sort of made sense but it certainly
wasn’t like anything he’d ever heard before. And then Harry Potter had
said something Draco couldn’t possibly let pass. “You think mudbloods
are stronger?”
“I think nothing,” said the shadowy ﬁgure. “I know nothing. I believe nothing. My bottom line is not yet written. I will ﬁgure out how
to test the magical strength of Muggleborns, and the magical strength of
purebloods. If my tests tell me that Muggleborns are weaker, I will believe they are weaker. If my tests tell me that Muggleborns are stronger,
I will believe they are stronger. Knowing this and other truths, I will
gain some measure of power—”
“And you expect me to believe whatever you say?” Draco demanded
hotly.
“I expect you to perform the tests personally,” said the shadowy ﬁgure
*

355 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

quietly. “Are you afraid of what you will ﬁnd?”
Draco stared at the shadowy ﬁgure for a while, his eyes narrowed.
“Nice trap, Harry,” he said. “I’ll have to remember that one, it’s new.”
The shadowy ﬁgure shook his head. “It’s not a trap, Draco. Remember—I don’t know what we’ll ﬁnd. But you do not understand the
universe by arguing with it or telling it to come back with a diﬀerent
answer next time. When you put on the robes of a scientist you must
forget all your politics and arguments and factions and sides, silence the
desperate clingings of your mind, and wish only to hear the answer of
Nature.” The shadowy ﬁgure paused. “Most people can’t do it. That’s
why this is diﬃcult. Are you sure you wouldn’t rather just learn about
the brain?”
“And if I tell you I’d rather learn about the brain,” Draco said, his
voice now hard, “you’ll go around telling people that I was afraid of what
I’d ﬁnd.”
“No,” said the shadowy ﬁgure. “I will do no such thing.”
“But you might do the same sort of tests yourself, and if you got the
wrong answer, I wouldn’t be there to say anything before you showed it
to someone else.” Draco’s voice was still hard.
“I would still ask you ﬁrst, Draco,” the shadowy ﬁgure said quietly.
Draco paused. He hadn’t been expecting that, he’d thought he saw
the trap but... “You would?”
“Of course. How would I know who to blackmail or what we could
ask from them? Draco, I say again that this is not a trap I set for you.
At least not for you personally. If your politics were diﬀerent, I would
be saying, what if the test shows that purebloods are stronger.”
“Really.”
“Yes! That’s the price anyone has to pay to become a scientist!”
Draco held up a hand. He had to think.
The shadowy, green-lit ﬁgure waited.
It didn’t take long to think about, though. If you discarded all the
confusing parts... then Harry Potter was planning to mess around with
something that could cause a gigantic political explosion, and it would
be insane to just walk away and let him do it on his own. “We’ll study
blood,” said Draco.
*

356 *

**
*

RATIONALIZATION

*
*

*

“Excellent,” said the ﬁgure, and smiled. “Congratulations on being
willing to ask the question.”
“Thanks,” Draco said, not quite managing to keep the irony out of
his voice.
“Hey, did you think going to the Moon was easy? Be glad this just
involves changing your mind sometimes, and not a human sacriﬁce!”
“Human sacriﬁce would be way easier!”
There was a slight pause, and then the ﬁgure nodded. “Fair point.”
“Look, Harry,” said Draco without much hope, “I thought the idea
was to take all the things that Muggles know, combine them with things
that wizards know, and become masters of both worlds. Wouldn’t it be
a lot easier to just study all the things that Muggles already found out,
like the Moon stuﬀ, and use that power—”
“No,” said the ﬁgure with a sharp shake of his head, sending green
shadows moving around his nose and eyes. His voice had turned very
grim. “If you cannot learn the scientist’s art of accepting reality, then I
must not tell you what that acceptance has discovered. It would be like
a powerful wizard telling you of those gates which must not be opened,
and those seals which must not be broken, before you had proven your
intelligence and discipline by surviving the lesser perils.”
A chill went down Draco’s spine and he shuddered involuntarily. He
knew it had been visible even in the dim light. “All right,” said Draco.
“I understand.” Father had told him that many times. When a more
powerful wizard told you that you weren’t ready to know, you didn’t
pry any further if you wanted to live.
The ﬁgure inclined his head. “Indeed. But there is something else
you should understand. The ﬁrst scientists, being Muggles, lacked your
traditions. In the beginning they simply did not comprehend the notion
of dangerous knowledge, and thought that all things known should be
spoken freely. When their searches turned dangerous, they told their
politicians of things that should have stayed secret—don’t look like that,
Draco, it wasn’t simple stupidity. They did have to be smart enough
to uncover the secret in the ﬁrst place. But they were Muggles, it was
the ﬁrst time they’d found anything really dangerous, and they didn’t
start out with a tradition of secrecy. There was a war going on, and the
*

357 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

scientists on one side worried that if they didn’t talk, the scientists of the
enemy country would tell their politicians ﬁrst...” The voice trailed oﬀ
signiﬁcantly. “They didn’t destroy the world. But it was close. And we
are not going to repeat that mistake.”
“Right,” Draco said, his voice now very ﬁrm. “We won’t. We’re
wizards, and studying science doesn’t make us Muggles.”
“As you say,” said the green-lit silhouette. “We will establish our own
Science, a magical Science, and that Science will have smarter traditions
from the very start.” The voice grew hard. “The knowledge I share with
you will be taught alongside the disciplines of accepting truth, the level
of this knowledge will be keyed to your progress in those disciplines,
and you will share that knowledge with no one else who has not learned
those disciplines. Do you accept this?”
“Yes,” said Draco. What was he supposed to do, say no?
“Good. And what you discover for yourself, you will keep to yourself unless you think that other scientists are ready to know it. What
we do share among ourselves, we will not tell the world unless we agree
it is safe for the world to know. And whatever our own politics and
allegiances, we will all punish any of our number who reveal dangerous
magics or give away dangerous weapons, no matter what sort of war is
going on. From this day onward, that will be the tradition and the law
of science among wizards. Are we agreed on that?”
“Yes,” said Draco. Actually this was starting to sound pretty attractive. The Death Eaters had tried to take power by being scarier than
everyone else, and they hadn’t actually won yet. Maybe it was time to
try ruling using secrets instead. “And our group stays hidden for as long
as possible, and everyone in it has to agree to our rules.”
“Of course. Deﬁnitely.”
There was a very short pause.
“We’re going to need better robes,” said the shadowy ﬁgure, “with
hoods and so on—”
“I was just thinking that,” said Draco. “We don’t need whole new
robes, though, just cowled cloaks to put on. I have a friend in Slytherin,
she’ll take your measurements—”
“Don’t tell her what it’s for, though—”
*

358 *

**
*

RATIONALIZATION

*
*

*

“I’m not stupid!”
“And no masks for now, not when it’s just you and I—” said the
shadowy ﬁgure.
“Right! But later on we should have some sort of special mark that
all our servants have, the Mark of Science, like a snake eating the Moon
on their right arms—”
“It’s called a PhD and wouldn’t that make it too easy to identify our
people?”
“Huh?”
“I mean, what if someone is like ‘okay, now everyone pull up their
robes over their right arms’ and our guy is like ‘whoops, sorry, looks
like I’m a spy’—”
“Forget I said anything,” said Draco, sweat suddenly springing out
all over his body. He needed a distraction, fast—“And what do we call
ourselves? The Science Eaters?”
“No,” said the shadowy ﬁgure slowly. “That doesn’t sound right...”
Draco wiped his robed arm across his forehead, wiping away beads
of moisture. What had the Dark Lord been thinking? Father had said
the Dark Lord was smart!
“I’ve got it!” said the shadowy ﬁgure suddenly. “You won’t understand yet, but trust me, it ﬁts.”
Right now Draco would have accepted ‘Malfoy Munchers’ as long as
it changed the subject. “What is it?”
And standing amid the dusty desks in an unused classroom in the
dungeons of Hogwarts, the green-lit silhouette of Harry Potter spread
his arms dramatically and said, “This day shall mark the dawn of... the
Bayesian Conspiracy.”

**
*
A silent ﬁgure trudged wearily through the halls of Hogwarts in the
direction of Ravenclaw.
Harry had gone straight from the meeting with Draco to dinner, and
stayed at dinner barely long enough to choke down a few fast gulps of
food before going oﬀ to bed.
*

359 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

It wasn’t even 7pm yet, but it was well past bedtime for Harry. He’d
realized last night that he wouldn’t be able to use the Time-Turner on
Saturday until after the book-reading contest was already over. But he
could still use the Time-Turner on Friday night, and gain time that way.
So Harry had pushed himself to stay awake until 9pm on Friday, when
the protective shell opened, and then used the four hours remaining on
the Time-Turner to spin back to 5pm and collapse into sleep. He’d woken
up around 2pm on Saturday morning, just as planned, and read for the
next twelve hours straight... and it still hadn’t been enough. And now
Harry would be going to sleep rather early for the next few days, until
his sleep cycle caught up again.
The portrait on the door asked Harry some dumb riddle meant
for eleven-year-olds that he answered without the words even passing
through his conscious mind, and then Harry staggered up the stairs to
his dorm room, changed into his pajamas and collapsed into bed.
And found that his pillow seemed rather lumpy.
Harry groaned. He sat up reluctantly, twisted in bed, and lifted up
his pillow.
This revealed a note, two golden Galleons, and a book titled Occlumency: The Hidden Arte.
Harry picked up the note and read:
My, you do get yourself into trouble and quickly. James himself was
no match for you.
You have made a powerful enemy. Snape commands the loyalty,
admiration, and fear of all House Slytherin. You cannot trust any
of that House now, whether they come to you in friendly guise or
fearsome.
From now on you must not meet Snape’s eyes. He is a Legilimens
and can read your mind if you do. I have enclosed a book which may
help you learn to protect yourself, though there is only so far you can
get without a tutor. Still you may hope to at least detect intrusion.
So that you may ﬁnd some extra time in which to study Occlumency, I have enclosed 2 Galleons, which is the price of answer
sheets and homework for the ﬁrst-year History of Magic class (Professor Binns having given the same tests and same assignments every
*

360 *

**
*

RATIONALIZATION

*
*

*

year since he died). Your newfound friends the Weasley twins should
be able to sell you a copy. It goes without saying that you must not
get caught with it in your possession.
Of Professor Quirrell I know little. He is a Slytherin and a Defense Professor, and that is two marks against him. Consider carefully any advice he gives you, and tell him nothing you do not wish
known.
Dumbledore only pretends to be insane. He is extremely intelligent, and if you continue to step into closets and vanish, he will
certainly deduce your possession of an invisibility cloak if he has not
done so already. Avoid him whenever possible, hide the Cloak of Invisibility somewhere safe (not your pouch) any time you cannot avoid
him, and step with great care in his presence.
Please be more careful in the future, Harry Potter.
—Santa Claus
Harry stared at the note.
It did seem to be pretty good advice. Of course Harry wasn’t going
to cheat in History class even if they gave him a dead monkey for a
professor. But Severus’s Legilimency... whoever’d sent this note knew a
lot of important, secret things and was willing to tell Harry about them.
The note was still warning him against Dumbledore stealing the Cloak
but at this point Harry honestly had no clue if that was a bad sign, it
could just be an understandable mistake.
There seemed to be some sort of intrigue going on inside Hogwarts.
Maybe if Harry compared stories between Dumbledore and the notesender, he could work out a combined picture that would be accurate?
Like if they both agreed on something, then...
...whatever...
Harry stuﬀed everything into his pouch and turned up the Quieter
and pulled the cover over his head and died.

**
*
*

361

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

It was Sunday morning and Harry was eating pancakes in the Great Hall,
sharp quick bites, glancing nervously at his watch every few seconds.
It was 8:02am, and in precisely two hours and one minute, it would
be exactly one week since he’d seen the Weasleys and crossed over onto
Platform Nine and Three-Quarters.
And the thought had occurred to him... Harry didn’t know if this
was a valid way to think about the universe, he didn’t know anything
any more, but it seemed possible...
That...
Not enough interesting things had happened to him over the last week.
When he was done eating breakfast, Harry planned to go straight up
to his room and hide in the bottom level of his trunk and not talk to
anyone until 10:03am.
And that was when Harry saw the Weasley twins walking toward
him. One of them was carrying something concealed behind his back.
He should scream and run away.
He should scream and run away.
Whatever this was... it could very well be...
...the grand ﬁnale...
He really should just scream and run away.
With a resigned feeling that the universe would come and get him
anyway, Harry continued slicing at the pancake with his fork and knife.
He couldn’t muster the energy. That was the sad truth. Harry knew
now how people felt when they were tired of running, tired of trying
to escape fate, and they just fell to the ground and let the horriﬁcally
befanged and tentacled demons of the darkest abyss drag them oﬀ to
their unspeakable destiny.
The Weasley twins drew closer.
And yet closer.
Harry ate another bite of pancake.
The Weasley twins arrived, grinning brightly.
“Hello, Fred,” Harry said dully. One of the twins nodded. “Hello,
George.” The other twin nodded.

*

362 *

**
*

RATIONALIZATION

*
*

*

“You sound tired,” said George.
“You should cheer up,” said Fred.
“Look what we got you!”
And George took, from behind Fred’s back—
A cake with twelve ﬂaming candles.
There was a pause, as the Ravenclaw table stared at them.
“That’s not right,” said someone. “Harry Potter was born on the
thirty-ﬁrst of Jul—”
“He is coming,” said a huge hollow voice that cut through all conversation like a sword of ice. “The one who will tear apart the very—”
Dumbledore had leapt out of his throne and run straight over the
Head Table and seized hold of the woman speaking those awful words,
Fawkes had appeared in a ﬂash, and all three of them vanished in a crack
of ﬁre.
There was a shocked pause...
...followed by heads turning in the direction of Harry Potter.
“I didn’t do it,” Harry said in a tired voice.
“That was a prophecy!” someone at the table hissed. “And I bet it’s
about you!”
Harry sighed.
He stood up from his seat, raised his voice, and said very loudly over
the conversations that were starting up, “It’s not about me! Obviously!
I’m not coming here, I’m already here!”
Harry sat back down again.
The people who had been looking at him turned away again.
Someone else at the table said, “Then who is it about?”
And with a dull, leaden sensation, Harry realized who wasn’t already
at Hogwarts.
Call it a wild guess, but Harry had a feeling the undead Dark Lord
would be showing up one of these days.
The conversation continued on around him.
“Not to mention, tear apart the very what?”
“I thought I heard Trelawney start to say something with an ‘S’ just
before the Headmaster grabbed her.”
“Like... soul? Sun?”
*

363 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

“If someone’s going to tear apart the Sun we’re really in trouble!”
That seemed rather unlikely to Harry, unless the world contained
scary things which had heard of David Criswell’s ideas about star lifting.
“So,” Harry said in tired tones, “this happens every Sunday breakfast,
does it?”
“No,” said a student who might have been in his seventh year, frowning grimly. “It doesn’t.”
Harry shrugged. “Whatever. Anyone want some birthday cake?”
“But it’s not your birthday!” said the same student who’d objected
last time.
That was the cue for Fred and George to start laughing, of course.
Even Harry managed a weary smile.
As the ﬁrst slice was served to him, Harry said, “I’ve had a really long
week.”

**
*
And Harry was sitting in the cavern level of his trunk, slid shut and
locked so no one could get in, a blanket pulled over his head, waiting for
the week to be over.
10:01.
10:02.
10:03, but just to be sure...
10:04 and the ﬁrst week was done.
Harry breathed a sigh of relief, and gingerly pulled the blanket oﬀ of
his head.
A few moments later, he had emerged into the bright sunlit air of his
dorm.
Shortly after, and he was in the Ravenclaw common room. A few
people looked at him, but no one said anything or tried to talk to him.
Harry found a nice wide writing desk, pulled back a comfortable
chair, and sat down. From his pouch he drew a sheet of paper and a
pencil.
Mum and Dad had told Harry in no uncertain terms that while they
understood his enthusiasm for leaving home and getting away from his
*

364 *

**
*

RATIONALIZATION

*
*

*

parents, he was to write them every week without fail, just so that they
knew he was alive, unharmed, and not in prison.
Harry stared down at the blank sheet of paper. Let’s see...
After leaving his parents at the train station, he’d...
...gotten acquainted with a boy raised by Darth Vader, become
friends with the three most infamous pranksters in Hogwarts, met Hermione, then there’d been the Incident with the Sorting Hat... Monday
he’d been given a time machine to treat his sleep disorder, gotten a legendary invisibility cloak from an unknown benefactor, rescued seven
Huﬄepuﬀs by staring down ﬁve scary older boys one of whom had
threatened to break his ﬁnger, realized that he possessed a mysterious
dark side, learned to cast Frigideiro in Charms class, and gotten started
on his rivalry with Hermione... Tuesday had introduced Astronomy
taught by Professor Aurora Sinistra who was nice, and History of Magic
taught by a ghost who ought to be exorcised and replaced with a tape
recorder... Wednesday, he’d been pronounced the Most Dangerous Student in the Classroom... Thursday, let’s not even think about Thursday... Friday, the Incident in Potions Class, followed by his blackmailing
the Headmaster, followed by the Defense Professor having him beaten
up in class, followed by the Defense Professor turning out to be the most
awesome human being who still walked the face of the Earth... Saturday
he’d lost a bet and gone on his ﬁrst date and started redeeming Draco...
and then this morning Professor Trelawney’s unheard prophecy might
or might not indicate that an immortal Dark Lord was about to attack
Hogwarts.
Harry mentally organized his material, and started writing.
Dear Mum and Dad:
Hogwarts is lots of fun. I learned how to violate the Second Law
of Thermodynamics in Charms class, and I met a girl named Hermione Granger who reads faster than I do.
I’d better leave it at that.
Your loving son
Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres.

*

365 *

CHAPTER

TWENT Y-TWO

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD
small study room, near but not in the Ravenclaw dorm, one of the
many many unused rooms of Hogwarts. Gray stone the ﬂoors, red
brick the walls, dark stained wood the ceiling, four glowing glass globes
set into the four walls of the room. A circular table that looked like a
wide slab of black marble set on thick black marble legs for columns, but
which had proved to be very light (weight and mass both) and wasn’t
diﬃcult to pick up and move around if necessary. Two comfortably
cushioned chairs which had seemed at ﬁrst to be locked to the ﬂoor in
inconvenient places, but which would, the two of them had ﬁnally discovered, scoot around to where you stood as soon as you leaned over in
a posture that looked like you were about to sit down.
There also seemed to be a number of bats ﬂying around the room.
That was where, future historians would one day record—if the
whole project ever actually amounted to anything—the scientiﬁc study
of magic had begun, with two young ﬁrst-year Hogwarts students.
Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres, theorist.
And Hermione Jean Granger, experimenter and test subject.
Harry was doing better in classes now, at least the classes he considered interesting. He’d read more books, and not books for eleven-yearolds either. He’d practiced Transﬁguration over and over during one of
his extra hours every day, taking the other hour for beginning Occlumency. He was taking the worthwhile classes seriously, not just turning
in his homework every day, but using his free time to learn more than
was required, to read other books beyond the given textbooks, looking
to master the subject and not just memorize a few test answers, to excel. You didn’t see that much outside Ravenclaw. And now even within

A

*

367 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Ravenclaw, his only remaining competitors were Padma Patil (whose
parents came from a non-English-speaking culture and thus had raised
her with an actual work ethic), Anthony Goldstein (out of a certain tiny
ethnic group that won 25% of the Nobel Prizes), and of course, striding far above everyone like a Titan strolling through a pack of puppies,
Hermione Granger.
To run this particular experiment you needed the test subject to learn
sixteen new spells, on their own, without help or correction. That
meant the test subject was Hermione. Period.
It should be mentioned at this point that the bats ﬂying around the
room were not glowing.
Harry was having trouble accepting the implications of this.
“Oogely boogely!” Hermione said again.
Again, at the tip of Hermione’s wand, there was the abrupt, transitionless appearance of a bat. One moment, empty air. The next moment, bat. Its wings seemed to be already moving in the instant when it
appeared.
And it still wasn’t glowing.
“Can I stop now?” said Hermione.
“Are you sure,” Harry said through what seemed to be a block in
his throat, “that maybe with a bit more practice you couldn’t get it to
glow?” He was violating the experimental procedure he’d written down
beforehand, which was a sin, and he was violating it because he didn’t
like the results he was getting, which was a mortal sin, you could go to
Science Hell for that, but it didn’t seem to be mattering anyway.
“What did you change this time?” Hermione said, sounding a little
weary.
“The durations of the oo, eh, and ee sounds. It’s supposed to be 3 to
2 to 2, not 3 to 1 to 1.”
“Oogely boogely!” said Hermione.
The bat materialized with only one wing and spun pathetically to
the ﬂoor, ﬂopping around in a circle on the gray stone.
“Now what is it really?” said Hermione.
“3 to 2 to 1.”
“Oogely boogely!”
*

368 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

This time the bat didn’t have any wings at all and fell with a plop like
a dead mouse.
“3 to 1 to 2.”
And lo the bat did materialize and it did ﬂy up at once toward the
ceiling, healthy and glowing a bright green.
Hermione nodded in satisfaction. “Okay, what next?”
There was a long pause.
“Seriously? You seriously have to say Oogely boogely with the duration
of the oo, eh, and ee sounds having a ratio of 3 to 1 to 2, or the bat won’t
glow? Why? Why? For the love of all that is sacred, why?”
“Why not?”
“Aaaaaaaaarrrrrrghhhh!”
Thud. Thud. Thud.
Harry had thought about the nature of magic for a while, and then
designed a series of experiments based on the premise that virtually everything wizards believed about magic was wrong.
You couldn’t really need to say ‘Wingardium Leviosa’ in exactly
the right way in order to levitate something, because, come on,
‘Wingardium Leviosa’? The universe was going to check that you said
‘Wingardium Leviosa’ in exactly the right way and otherwise it wouldn’t
make the quill ﬂoat?
No. Obviously no, once you thought about it seriously. Someone,
quite possibly an actual preschool child, but at any rate some Englishspeaking magic user, who thought that ‘Wingardium Leviosa’ sounded
all ﬂyish and ﬂoaty, had originally spoken those words while casting the
spell for the ﬁrst time. And then told everyone else it was necessary.
But (Harry had reasoned) it didn’t have to be that way, it wasn’t built
into the universe, it was built into you.
There was an old story passed down among scientists, a cautionary
tale, the story of Blondlot and the N-Rays.
Shortly after the discovery of X-Rays, an eminent French physicist
named Prosper-Rene Blondlot—who had been ﬁrst to measure the speed
of radio waves and show that they propagated at the speed of light—
had announced the discovery of an amazing new phenomenon, N-Rays,
which would induce a faint brightening of a screen. You had to look hard
*

369 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

to see it, but it was there. N-Rays had all sorts of interesting properties.
They were bent by aluminum and could be focused by an aluminum
prism into striking a treated thread of cadmium sulﬁde, which would
then glow faintly in the dark...
Soon dozens of other scientists had conﬁrmed Blondlot’s results, especially in France.
But there were still other scientists, in England and Germany, who
said they weren’t quite sure they could see that faint glow.
Blondlot had said they were probably setting up the machinery
wrong.
One day Blondlot had given a demonstration of N-Rays. The lights
had turned out, and his assistant had called oﬀ the brightening and darkening as Blondlot performed his manipulations.
It had been a normal demonstration, all the results going as expected.
Even though an American scientist named Robert Wood had quietly
stolen the aluminum prism from the center of Blondlot’s mechanism.
And that had been the end of N-Rays.
Reality, Philip K. Dick had once said, is that which, when you stop
believing in it, doesn’t go away.
Blondlot’s sin had been obvious in retrospect. He shouldn’t have
told his assistant what he was doing. Blondlot should have made sure the
assistant didn’t know what was being tried or when it was being tried,
before asking him to describe the screen’s brightness. It could have been
that simple.
Nowadays it was called “blinding” and it was one of the things modern scientists took for granted. If you were doing a psychology experiment to see whether people got angrier when they were hit over the
head with red truncheons than with green truncheons, you didn’t get
to look at the subjects yourself and decide how “angry” they were. You
would snap photos of them after they’d been hit with the truncheon,
and send the photos oﬀ to a panel of raters, who would rate on a scale of
1 to 10 how angry each person looked, obviously without knowing what
color of truncheon they’d been hit with. Indeed there was no good reason to tell the raters what the experiment was about, at all. You certainly
wouldn’t tell the experimental subjects that you thought they ought to be
*

370 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

angrier when hit by red truncheons. You’d just oﬀer them 20 pounds,
lure them into a test room, hit them with a truncheon, color randomly
assigned of course, and snap the photo. In fact the truncheon-hitting
and photo-snapping would be done by an assistant who hadn’t been told
about the hypothesis, so he couldn’t look expectant, hit harder, or snap
the photo at just the right time.
Blondlot had destroyed his reputation with the sort of mistake that
would get a failing grade and probably derisive laughter from the T.A.
in a ﬁrst-year undergraduate course on experimental design... in 1991.
But this had been a bit longer ago, in 1904, and so it had taken
months before Robert Wood had formulated the obvious alternative hypothesis and ﬁgured out how to test it, and dozens of other scientists had
been sucked in.
More than two centuries after science had gotten started. That late
in scientiﬁc history, it still hadn’t been obvious.
Which made it entirely plausible that in the tiny wizarding world,
where science didn’t seem much known at all, no one had ever tried
the ﬁrst, the simplest, the most obvious thing that any modern scientist
would think to check.
The books were full of complicated instructions for all the things
you had to do exactly right in order to cast a spell. And, Harry had
hypothesized, the process of obeying those instructions, of checking that
you were following them correctly, probably did do something. It forced
you to concentrate on the spell. Being told to just wave your wand and
wish probably wouldn’t work as well. And once you believed the spell
was supposed to work a certain way, once you had practiced it that way,
you might not be able to convince yourself that it could work any other
way...
...if you did the simple but wrong thing, and tried to test alternative
forms yourself.
But what if you didn’t know what the original spell had been like?
What if you gave Hermione a list of spells she hadn’t studied yet,
taken from a book of silly prank spells in the Hogwarts library, and
some of those spells had the correct and original instructions, while others had one changed gesture, one changed word? What if you kept the
*

371

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

instructions constant, but told her that a spell supposed to create a red
worm was supposed to create a blue worm instead?
Well, in that case, it had turned out...
...Harry was having trouble believing his results here...
...if you told Hermione to say “Oogely boogely” with the vowel durations in the ratio of 3 to 1 to 1, instead of the correct ratio of 3 to 1 to
2, you still got the bat but it wouldn’t glow any more.
Not that belief was irrelevant here. Not that only the words and
wand movements mattered.
If you gave Hermione completely incorrect information about what
a spell was supposed to do, it would stop working.
If you didn’t tell her at all what the spell was supposed to do, it would
stop working.
If she knew in very vague terms what the spell was supposed to do,
or she was only partially wrong, then the spell would work as originally
described in the book, not the way she’d been told it should.
Harry was, at this moment, literally banging his head against the
brick wall. Not hard. He didn’t want to damage his precious brains. But
if he didn’t have some outlet for his frustration, he would spontaneously
catch on ﬁre.
Thud. Thud. Thud.
It seemed the universe actually did want you to say ‘Wingardium
Leviosa’ and it wanted you to say it in a certain exact way and it didn’t
care what you thought the pronunciation should be any more than it
cared how you felt about gravity.
Whyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy?
The worst part of it was the smug, amused look on Hermione’s face.
Hermione had not been okay with sitting around obediently following Harry’s instructions without being told why.
So Harry had explained to her what they were testing.
Harry had explained why they were testing it.
Harry had explained why probably no wizard had tried it before
them.
Harry had explained that he was actually fairly conﬁdent of his prediction.
*

372 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

Because, Harry had said, there was no way that the universe actually
wanted you to say ‘Wingardium Leviosa’.
Hermione had pointed out that this was not what her books said.
Hermione had asked if Harry really thought he was smarter, at eleven
years old and just over a month into his Hogwarts education, than all
the other wizards in the world who disagreed with him.
Harry had said the following exact words:
“Of course.”
Now Harry was staring at the red brick directly in front of him and
contemplating how hard he would have to hit his head in order to give
himself a concussion that would interfere with long-term memory formation and prevent him from remembering this later. Hermione wasn’t
laughing, but he could feel her intent to laugh radiating out from behind
him like a dreadful pressure on his skin, sort of like knowing you were
being stalked by a serial killer only worse.
“Say it,” Harry said.
“I wasn’t going to,” said the kindly voice of Hermione Granger. “It
didn’t seem nice.”
“Just get it over with,” said Harry.
“Okay! So you gave me this whole long lecture about how hard it was
to do basic science and how we might need to stay on the problem for
thirty-ﬁve years, and then you went and expected us to make the greatest discovery in the history of magic in the ﬁrst hour we were working
together. You didn’t just hope, you really expected it. You’re silly.”
“Thank you. Now—”
“I’ve read all the books you gave me and I still don’t know what to call
that. Overconﬁdence? Planning fallacy? Super duper Lake Wobegon
eﬀect? They’ll have to name it after you. Harry Bias.”
“All right!”
“But it is cute. It’s such a boy thing to do.”
“Drop dead.”
“Aw, you say the most romantic things.”
Thud. Thud. Thud.
“So what’s next?” said Hermione.
Harry rested his head against the bricks. His forehead was starting
*

373 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

to hurt where he’d been banging it. “Nothing. I have to go back and
design diﬀerent experiments.”
Over the last month, Harry had carefully worked out, in advance, a
course of experimentation for them that would have lasted until December.
It would have been a great set of experiments if the very ﬁrst test had
not falsiﬁed the basic premise.
Harry could not believe he had been this dumb.
“Let me correct myself,” said Harry. “I need to design one new experiment. I’ll let you know when we’ve got it, and we’ll do it, and then
I’ll design the next one. How does that sound?”
“It sounds like someone wasted a whole lot of eﬀort.”
Thud. Ow. He’d done that a bit harder than he’d planned.
“So,” said Hermione. She was leaning back in her chair and the smug
look was back on her face. “What did we discover today?”
“I discovered,” said Harry through gritted teeth, “that when it comes
to doing truly basic research on a genuinely confusing problem where
you have no clue what’s going on, my books on scientiﬁc methodology
aren’t worth crap—”
“Language, Mr. Potter! Some of us are innocent young girls!”
“Fine. But if my books were worth a carp, that’s a kind of ﬁsh not
anything bad, they would have given me the following important piece
of advice: When there’s a confusing problem and you’re just starting out
and you have a falsiﬁable hypothesis, go test it. Find some simple, easy
way of doing a basic check and do it right away. Don’t worry about
designing an elaborate course of experiments that would make a grant
proposal look impressive to a funding agency. Just check as fast as possible whether your ideas are false before you start investing huge amounts
of eﬀort in them. How does that sound for a moral?”
“Mmm... okay,” said Hermione. “But I was also hoping for something like ‘Hermione’s books aren’t worthless. They’re written by wise
old wizards who know way more about magic than I do. I should pay
attention to what Hermione’s books say.’ Can we have that moral too?”
Harry’s jaw seemed to be clenched too tightly to let any words out,
so he just nodded.
*

374

*

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

“Great!” Hermione said. “I liked this experiment. We learned a lot
from it and it only took me an hour or so.”
“Aaaaaaaaaaaaaahhhhhhhhhhhhhhh!”

**
*
In the dungeons of Slytherin.
An unused classroom lit with eerie green light, much brighter this
time and coming from a small crystal globe with a temporary enchantment, but eerie green light nonetheless, casting strange shadows from
the dusty desks.
Two boy-sized ﬁgures in cowled grey cloaks (no masks) had entered
in silence, and sat down in two chairs opposite the same desk.
It was the second meeting of the Bayesian Conspiracy.
Draco Malfoy hadn’t been sure if he should look forward to it or not.
Harry Potter, judging by the expression on his face, didn’t seem to
have any doubts on the appropriate mood.
Harry Potter looked like he was ready to kill someone.
“Hermione Granger,” said Harry Potter, just as Draco was opening
his mouth. “Don’t ask.”
He couldn’t have gone on another date, could he? thought Draco, but
that didn’t make any sense.
“Harry,” said Draco, “I’m sorry but I have to ask this anyway, did
you really order the mudblood girl an expensive mokeskin pouch for her
birthday?”
“Yes, I did. You’ve already worked out why, of course.”
Draco reached up and raked ﬁngers through his hair in frustration,
his cowl brushing the back of his hand. He hadn’t been quite sure why,
but now he couldn’t say so. And Slytherin knew he was courting Harry
Potter, he’d made it obvious enough in Defense class. “Harry,” said
Draco, “people know I’m friends with you, they don’t know about the
Conspiracy of course, but they know we’re friends, and it makes me
look bad when you do that sort of thing.”
*

375 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Harry Potter’s face tightened. “Anyone in Slytherin who can’t understand the concept of acting nice toward people you don’t actually like
should be ground up and fed to pet snakes.”
“There are a lot of people in Slytherin who don’t,” Draco said, his
voice serious. “Most people are stupid, and you have to look good in
front of them anyway.” Harry Potter had to understand that if he ever
wanted to get anywhere in life.
“What do you care what other people think? Are you really going to
live your life needing to explain everything you do to the dumbest idiots in Slytherin, letting them judge you? I’m sorry, Draco, but I’m not
lowering my cunning plots to the level of what the dumbest Slytherins
can understand, just because it might make you look bad otherwise.
Not even your friendship is worth that. It would take all the fun out
of life. Tell me you haven’t ever thought the same thing when someone
in Slytherin is being too stupid to breathe, that it’s beneath the dignity
of a Malfoy to have to pander to them.”
Draco genuinely hadn’t. Ever. Pandering to idiots was like breathing, you did it without thinking about it.
“Harry,” Draco said at last. “Just doing whatever you want, without
worrying about how it looks, isn’t smart. The Dark Lord worried about
how he looked! He was feared and hated, and he knew exactly what sort
of fear and hate he wanted to create. Everyone has to worry about what
other people think.”
The cowled ﬁgure shrugged. “Perhaps. Remind me sometime to tell
you about something called Asch’s Conformity Experiment, you might
ﬁnd it quite amusing. For now I’ll just note that it’s dangerous to worry
about what other people think on instinct, because you actually care, not
as a matter of cold-blooded calculation. Remember, I was beaten and
bullied by older Slytherins for ﬁfteen minutes, and afterward I stood up
and graciously forgave them. Just like the good and virtuous Boy-WhoLived ought to do. But my cold-blooded calculations, Draco, tell me
that I have no use for the dumbest idiots in Slytherin, since I don’t own
a pet snake. So I have no reason to care what they think about how I
conduct my duel with Hermione Granger.”
Draco did not clench his ﬁsts in frustration. “She’s just some mud*

376 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

blood,” Draco said, keeping his voice calm, rather than shouting. “If you
don’t like her, push her down the stairs.”
“Ravenclaw would know—”
“Have Pansy Parkinson push her down the stairs! You wouldn’t even
have to manipulate her, oﬀer her a Sickle and she’d do it!”
“I would know! Hermione beat me in a book-reading contest, she’s
getting better grades than me, I have to defeat her with my brain or it
doesn’t count!”
“She’s just a mudblood! Why do you respect her that much?”
“She’s a power among Ravenclaws! Why do you care what some powerless idiot in Slytherin thinks?”
“It’s called politics! And if you can’t play it you can’t have power!”
“Walking on the moon is power! Being a great wizard is power! There
are kinds of power that don’t require me to spend the rest of my life pandering
to morons!”
Both of them stopped, and, in almost perfect unison, began taking
deep breaths to calm themselves.
“Sorry,” Harry Potter said after a few moments, wiping sweat from
his forehead. “Sorry, Draco. You’ve got a lot of political power and it
makes sense for you to keep it. You should be calculating what Slytherin
thinks. It’s an important game and I shouldn’t have insulted it. But
you can’t ask me to lower the level of my game in Ravenclaw, just so
that you don’t look bad by associating with me. Tell Slytherin you’re
gritting your teeth while you pretend to be my friend.”
That was exactly what Draco had told Slytherin, and he still wasn’t
sure whether it was true.
“Anyway,” Draco said. “Speaking of your image. I’m afraid I’ve got
some bad news. Rita Skeeter heard some of the stories about you and
she’s been asking questions.”
Harry Potter raised his eyebrows. “Who?”
“She writes for the Daily Prophet,” Draco said. He tried to keep the
worry out of his voice. The Daily Prophet was one of Father’s primary
tools, he used it like a wizard’s wand. “That’s the newspaper people
actually pay attention to. Rita Skeeter writes about celebrities, and as
she puts it, uses her quill to puncture their over-inﬂated reputations. If
*

377 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

she can’t ﬁnd any rumors about you, she’ll just make up her own.”
“I see,” said Harry Potter. His green-lit face looked very thoughtful
beneath the cowl.
Draco hesitated before saying what he had to say next. By now someone had certainly reported to Father that he was courting Harry Potter,
and Father would also know that Draco hadn’t written home about it,
and Father would understand that Draco didn’t think he could actually
keep it a secret, which sent a clear message that Draco was practicing his
own game now but still on Father’s side, since if Draco had been tempted
away, he would have been sending false reports.
It followed that Father had probably anticipated what Draco was
about to say next.
Playing the game with Father for real was a rather unnerving sensation. Even if they were on the same side. It was, on the one hand,
exhiliarating, but Draco also knew that in the end it would turn out
that Father had played the game better. There was no other way it could
possibly go.
“Harry,” Draco ﬁnally said. “This isn’t a suggestion. This isn’t my
advice. Just the way it is. My father could almost certainly quash that
article. But it would cost you.”
That Father had been expecting Draco to tell Harry Potter exactly
that was not something Draco said out loud. Harry Potter would work
it out on his own, or not.
But instead Harry Potter shook his head, smiling beneath the cowl.
“I have no intention of trying to quash Rita Skeeter.”
Draco didn’t even try to keep the incredulity out of his voice. “You
can’t tell me you don’t care what the newspaper says about you!”
“I care less than you might think,” said Harry Potter. “But I have
my own ways of dealing with the likes of Skeeter. I don’t need Lucius’s
help.”
A worried look came over Draco’s face before he could stop it. Whatever Harry Potter was about to do next, it would be something Father
wasn’t expecting, and Draco was feeling very nervous about where that
might lead.
Draco also realized that his hair was getting sweaty underneath the
*

378 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

cowl. He’d never actually worn one of those before, and hadn’t realized
that the Death Eaters’ cloaks probably had things like Cooling Charms.
Harry Potter wiped some sweat from his forehead again, grimaced,
took out his wand, pointed it upward, took a deep breath, and said
“Frigideiro!”
Moments later Draco felt the cold draft.
“Frigideiro! Frigideiro! Frigideiro! Frigideiro! Frigideiro!”
Then Harry Potter lowered the wand, though his hand seemed a bit
shaky, and put it back into his robes.
The whole room seemed perceptibly cooler. Draco could have done
that too, but still, not bad.
“So,” Draco said. “Science. You’re going to tell me about blood.”
“We’re going to ﬁnd out about blood,” Harry Potter said. “By doing
experiments.”
“All right,” Draco said. “What sort of experiments?”
Harry Potter smiled evilly beneath his cowl, and said, “You tell me.”

**
*
Draco had heard of something called the Socratic Method, which was
teaching by asking questions (named after an ancient philosopher who
had been too smart to be a real Muggle and hence had been a disguised
pureblood wizard). One of his tutors had used Socratic teaching a lot.
It had been annoying but eﬀective.
Then there was the Potter Method, which was insane.
To be fair, Draco had to admit that Harry Potter had tried the Socratic Method ﬁrst and it hadn’t been working too well.
Harry Potter had asked how Draco would go about disproving the
blood purist hypothesis that wizards couldn’t do the neat stuﬀ now that
they’d done eight centuries ago because they had interbred with Muggleborns and Squibs.
Draco had said that he did not understand how Harry Potter could
sit there with a straight face and claim this was not a trap.
*

379 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Harry Potter had replied, still with a straight face, that if it was a trap
it would have been so pathetically obvious that he ought to be ground up
and fed to pet snakes, but it was not a trap, it was simply a rule of how
scientists operated that you had to try to disprove your own theories,
and if you made an honest eﬀort and failed, that was victory.
Draco had tried to point out the staggering stupidity of this by suggesting that the key to surviving a duel was to cast Avada Kedavra on
your own foot and miss.
Harry Potter had nodded.
Draco had shaken his head.
Harry Potter had then presented the idea that scientists watched ideas
ﬁght to see which ones won, and you couldn’t ﬁght without an opponent,
so Draco needed to ﬁgure out opponents for the blood purist hypothesis
to ﬁght so that blood purism could win, which Draco understood a little
better even though Harry Potter had said it with a rather distasteful look.
Like, it was clear that if blood purism was the way the world really was,
then the sky just had to be blue, and if some other theory was true, the
sky just had to be green; and nobody had seen the sky yet; and then you
went outside and looked and the blood purists won; and after this had
happened six times in a row, people would start noticing the trend.
Harry Potter had then proceeded to claim that all the opponents
Draco was inventing were too weak, so blood purism wouldn’t get credit
for defeating them because the battle wouldn’t be impressive enough.
Draco had understood that too. Wizards have gotten weaker because house
elves are stealing our magic hadn’t sounded impressive to him either.
(Though Harry Potter had said that one at least was testable, in that
they could try to check if house elves had gotten stronger over time, and
even draw a picture representing the increasing strength of house elves
and another picture representing the decreasing strength of wizards and
if the two pictures matched that would point to the house elves, all said
in such completely serious tones that Draco had felt an impulse to ask
Dobby a few pointed questions under Veritaserum before snapping out
of it.)
And Harry Potter had ﬁnally said that Draco couldn’t ﬁx the battle,
scientists weren’t dumb, it would be obvious if you ﬁxed the battle, it had
*

380 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

to be a real ﬁght, between two diﬀerent theories that might both really be
true, with a test that only the true hypothesis would win, something that
actually would come out diﬀerent ways depending on which hypothesis
was actually correct, and there would be experienced scientists watching
to make sure that was exactly what happened. Harry Potter had claimed
that he himself just wanted to know how blood really worked and for that
he need to see blood purism really win and Draco wasn’t going to fool
him with theories that were just there to be knocked down.
Even having seen the point, Draco hadn’t been able to invent any
“plausible alternatives”, as Harry Potter put it, to the idea that wizards
were getting less powerful because they were mixing their blood with
mud. It was too obviously true.
It was then that Harry Potter had said, rather frustrated, that he
couldn’t imagine Draco was really this bad at considering diﬀerent viewpoints, surely there’d been Death Eaters who’d posed as enemies of blood
purism and had come up with much more plausible-sounding arguments
against their own side than Draco was oﬀering. If Draco had been trying to pose as a member of Dumbledore’s faction, and come up with the
house elf hypothesis, he wouldn’t have fooled anyone for a second.
Draco had been forced to admit this was a point.
Hence the Potter Method.
“Please, Dr. Malfoy,” whined Harry Potter, “why won’t you accept
my paper?”
Harry Potter had needed to repeat the phrase “just pretend to be
pretending to be a scientist” three times before Draco had understood.
In that moment Draco had realized that there was something deeply
wrong with Harry Potter’s brain, and anyone who tried Legilimency on
it would probably never come back out again.
Harry Potter had then gone into further and considerable detail:
Draco was to pretend to be a Death Eater who was posing as the editor of a scientiﬁc journal, Dr. Malfoy, who wanted to reject his enemy
Dr. Potter’s paper “On the Heritability of Magical Ability”, and if the
Death Eater didn’t act like a real scientist would, he would be revealed
as a Death Eater and executed, while Dr. Malfoy was also being watched
by his own rivals and needed to appear to reject Dr. Potter’s paper for
*

381

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

neutral scientiﬁc reasons or he would lose his position as journal editor.
It was a wonder the Sorting Hat wasn’t gibbering madly in
St. Mungo’s.
It was also the most complicated thing anyone had ever asked Draco
to pretend and there was no possible way he could have refused the challenge.
Right now they were, as Harry Potter had put it, getting in the mood.
“I’m afraid, Dr. Potter, that you wrote this in the wrong color of
ink,” Draco said. “Next!”
Dr. Potter’s face did an excellent job of crumpling in despair, and
Draco couldn’t help but feel a ﬂash of Dr. Malfoy’s glee, even though
the Death Eater was only pretending to be Dr. Malfoy.
This part was fun. He could have done this all day long.
Dr. Potter got up from the chair, slumped over in dismay, and
trudged oﬀ, and turned into Harry Potter, who gave Draco a thumbsup, and then turned back into Dr. Potter again, now approaching with
an eager smile.
Dr. Potter sat down and presented Dr. Malfoy with a piece of parchment on which was written:
On the Heritability of Magical Ability
Dr. H. J. Potter-Evans-Verres, Institute for Suﬃciently Advanced Science
My observation:
Today’s wizards can’t do things as impressive as
what wizards used to do 800 years ago.
My conclusion:
Wizardkind has become weaker by mixing
their blood with Muggleborns and Squibs.
“Dr. Malfoy,” said Dr. Potter with a hopeful look, “I was wondering
if the Journal of Irreproducible Results could consider for publication my
paper entitled ‘On the Heritability of Magical Ability’.”
Draco looked at the parchment, smiling while he considered possible
rejections. If he was a professor, he would have refused the essay as too
short, so—
*

382 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

“It’s too long, Dr. Potter,” said Dr. Malfoy.
For a moment there was genuine incredulity on Dr. Potter’s face.
“Ah...” said Dr. Potter. “How about if I get rid of the separate lines
for observations and conclusions, and just put in a therefore—”
“Then it’ll be too short. Next!”
Dr. Potter trudged oﬀ.
“All right,” said Harry Potter, “you’re getting too good at this. Two
more times to practice, and then third time is for real, no interruptions
between, I’ll just come in straight at you and that time you’ll reject the
paper based on the actual content, remember, your scientiﬁc rivals are
watching.”
Dr. Potter’s next paper was perfect in every way, a marvel of its kind,
but unfortunately had to be rejected because Dr. Malfoy’s journal was
having trouble with the letter E. Dr. Potter oﬀered to rewrite it without
those words, and Dr. Malfoy explained that it was really more of a vowel
problem.
The paper after that was rejected because it was Tuesday.
It was, in fact, Saturday.
Dr. Potter tried to point this out and was told “Next!”
(Draco was starting to understand why Snape had used his hold over
Dumbledore just to get a position that let him be awful to students.)
And then—
Dr. Potter was approaching with a superior smirk on his face.
“This is my latest paper, On the Heritability of Magical Ability,” Dr.
Potter stated conﬁdently, and thrust out the parchment. “I have decided
to allow your journal to publish it, and have prepared it in perfect accordance with your guidelines so that you may publish it quickly.”
The Death Eater decided to track down and kill Dr. Potter after his
mission was done. Dr. Malfoy kept a polite smile on his face, since his
rivals were watching, and said...
(The pause stretched, with Dr. Potter looking at him impatiently.)
“...Let me look at that, please.”
Dr. Malfoy took the parchment and perused it carefully.
The Death Eater was starting to get nervous about the fact that he
wasn’t a real scientist, and Draco was trying to remember how to talk
*

383 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

like Harry Potter.
“You, ah, need to consider other possible explanations for your, um,
observation, besides just this one—”
“Really?” interrupted Dr. Potter. “Like what, exactly? House elves
are stealing our magic? My data admit of only one possible conclusion,
Dr. Malfoy. There are no other plausible hypotheses.”
Draco was trying furiously to order his brain to think, what would
he say if he was posing as a member of Dumbledore’s faction, what
did they claim was the explanation for wizardkind’s decline, Draco had
never bothered to actually ask that...
“If you can’t think of any other way to explain my data, you’ll have
to publish my paper, Dr. Malfoy.”
It was the sneer on Dr. Potter’s face that did it.
“Oh yeah?” snapped Dr. Malfoy. “How do you know that magic
itself isn’t fading away?”
Time stopped.
Draco and Harry Potter exchanged looks of appalled horror.
Then Harry Potter spat something that was probably an extremely
bad word if you’d been raised by Muggles. “I didn’t think of that!” said
Harry Potter. “And I should have. The magic goes away. Damn, damn,
damn!”
The alarm in Harry Potter’s voice was contagious. Without even
thinking about it, Draco’s hand went into his robes and clutched at his
wand. He’d thought the House of Malfoy was safe, so long as you only
married into families that could trace their bloodlines back four generations you were supposed to be safe, it had never occurred to him before
that there might be nothing anyone could do to stop the end of magic.
“Harry, what do we do?” Draco’s voice was rising in panic. “What do
we do?”
“Let me think!”
After a few moments, Harry grabbed from a nearby desk the same
quill and roll of parchment he’d used to write his pretend paper, and
started scribbling something.
“We’ll ﬁgure it out,” Harry said, his voice tight, “if magic is fading
out of the world we’ll ﬁgure out how fast it’s fading and how much time
*

384 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

we have left to do something, and then we’ll ﬁgure out why it’s fading,
and then we’ll do something about it. Draco, have wizarding powers
been declining at a steady rate, or have there been sudden drops?”
“I... I don’t know...”
“You told me that no one had matched the four founders of Hogwarts. So it’s been going on for at least eight centuries, then? You can’t
remember hearing anything about the problems suddenly appearing ﬁve
centuries ago or anything like that?”
Draco was trying frantically to think. “I always heard that nobody
was as good as Merlin and then after that nobody was as good as the
Founders of Hogwarts.”
“All right,” Harry said. He was still scribbling. “Because three centuries ago is when Muggles started to not believe in magic, which I
thought might have something to do with it. And about a century and a
half ago was when Muggles began using a kind of technology that stops
working around magic and I was wondering if it might also go the other
way around.”
Draco exploded out of his chair, so angry he could hardly even speak.
“It’s the Muggles—”
“Damn it!” roared Harry. “Weren’t you even listening to yourself?
It’s been going on for eight centuries at least and the Muggles weren’t
doing anything interesting then! We have to ﬁgure out the real truth!
The Muggles might have something to do with this but if they don’t
and you go blaming everything on them and that stops us from ﬁguring
out what’s really going on then one day you’re going to wake up in the
morning and ﬁnd out that your wand is just a stick of wood!”
Draco’s breath stopped in his throat. His father often said our wands
will break in our hands in his speeches but Draco had never really thought
before about what that meant, it wasn’t going to happen to him after all.
And now suddenly it seemed very real. Just a stick of wood. Draco could
imagine just what it would be like to take out his wand and try to cast a
spell and ﬁnd that nothing was happening...
That could happen to everyone.
There would be no more wizards, no more magic, ever. Just Muggles
who had a few legends about what their ancestors had been able to do.
*

385 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Some of the Muggles would be called Malfoy, and that would be all that
was left of the name.
For the ﬁrst time in his life, Draco realized why there were Death
Eaters.
He’d always taken for granted that becoming a Death Eater was
something you did when you grew up. Now Draco understood, he knew
why Father and Father’s friends had sworn to give their lives to prevent
the nightmare from coming to pass, there were things you couldn’t just
stand by and watch happen. But what if it was going to happen anyway,
what if all the sacriﬁces, all the friends they’d lost to Dumbledore, the
family they’d lost, what if it had all been for nothing...
“Magic can’t be fading away,” Draco said. His voice was breaking.
“It wouldn’t be fair.”
Harry stopped scribbling and looked up. His face had an angry expression. “Your father never told you that life isn’t fair?”
Father had said that every single time Draco used the word. “But,
but, it’s too awful to believe that—”
“Draco, let me introduce you to something I call the Litany of Tarski.
It changes every time you use it. On this occasion it runs like so: If
magic is fading out of the world, I want to believe that magic is fading out of
the world. If magic is not fading out of the world, I want not to believe that
magic is fading out of the world. Let me not become attached to beliefs I may
not want. If we’re living in a world where magic is fading, that’s what we
have to believe, we have to know what’s coming, so we can stop it, or in
the very worst case, be prepared to do what we can in the time we have
left. Not believing it won’t stop it from happening. So the only question
we have to ask is whether magic is actually fading, and if that’s the world
we live in then that’s what we want to believe. Litany of Gendlin: What’s
true is already so, owning up to it doesn’t make it worse. Got that, Draco?
I’m going to make you memorize it later. It’s something you repeat
to yourself any time you start wondering if it’s a good idea to believe
something that isn’t actually true. In fact I want you to say it right now.
What’s true is already so, owning up to it doesn’t make it worse. Say it.”
“What’s true is already so,” repeated Draco, his voice trembling,
“owning up to it doesn’t make it worse.”
*

386 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

“If magic is fading, I want to believe that magic is fading. If magic is
not fading, I want not to believe that magic is fading. Say it.”
Draco repeated back the words, the sickness churning in his stomach.
“Good,” Harry said, “remember, it might not be happening, and then
you won’t have to believe it, either. First we just want to know what’s
actually going on, which world we actually live in.” Harry turned back
to his work, scribbled some more, and then turned the parchment so
Draco could see it. Draco leaned over the desk and Harry brought the
green light closer.
Observation:
Wizardry isn’t as powerful now as it was when Hogwarts was founded.
Hypotheses:
1. Magic itself is fading.
2. Wizards are interbreeding with Muggles and Squibs.
3. Knowledge to cast powerful spells is being lost.
4. Wizards are eating the wrong foods as children, or something else besides
blood is making them grow up weaker.
5. Muggle technology is interfering with magic. (Since 800 years ago?)
6. Stronger wizards are having fewer children. (Draco = only child? Check
if 3 powerful wizards, Quirrell / Dumbledore / Dark Lord, had any
children.)
Tests:
“All right,” Harry said. His breathing sounded a little calmer. “Now
when you’re dealing with a confusing problem and you have no idea
what’s going on, the smart thing to do is ﬁgure out some really simple
tests, things you can look at right away. We need fast tests that distinguish between these hypotheses. Observations that would come out a
diﬀerent way for at least one of them compared to all the other ones.”
Draco stared at the list in shock. He was suddenly realizing that
he knew an awful lot of purebloods who were only children. Himself,
*

387 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Vincent, Gregory, practically everyone. The two most powerful wizards
everyone talked about were Dumbledore and the Dark Lord and neither
had any children just like Harry had suspected...
“It’s going to be really hard to distinguish between 2 and 6,” Harry
said, “it’s in the blood either way, you’d have to try and track the decline of wizardry and compare that to how many kids diﬀerent wizards
were having and measure the abilities of Muggleborns compared to purebloods...” Harry’s ﬁngers were tapping nervously on the desk. “Let’s
just lump 6 in with 2 and call them the blood hypothesis for now. 4 is
unlikely because then everyone would notice a sudden drop when the
wizards switched to new foods, it’s hard to see what would’ve changed
steadily over 800 years. 5 is unlikely for the same reason, no sudden
drop, Muggles weren’t doing anything 800 years back. 4 looks like 2
and 5 looks like 1 anyway. So mainly we should be trying to distinguish
between 1, 2, and 3.” Harry turned the parchment to himself, drew an
ellipse around those three numbers, turned it back. “Magic is fading,
blood is weakening, knowledge is disappearing. What test comes out
diﬀerently depending on which of those is true? What could we see that
would mean any one of these was false?”
“I don’t know!” blurted Draco. “Why are you asking me? You’re
the scientist!”
“Draco,” Harry said, a note of pleading desperation in his voice, “I
only know what Muggle scientists know! You grew up in the wizarding
world, I didn’t! You know more magic than I do and you know more
about magic than I do and you thought of this whole idea in the ﬁrst
place, so start thinking like a scientist and solve this!”
Draco swallowed hard and stared at the paper.
Magic is fading... wizards are interbreeding with Muggles... knowledge is being lost...
“What does the world look like if magic is fading?” said Harry Potter.
“You know more about magic, you should be the one guessing not me!
Imagine you’re telling a story about it, what happens in the story?”
Draco imagined it. “Charms that used to work stop working.” Wizards wake up and ﬁnd that their wands are sticks of wood...
“What does the world look like if the wizarding blood gets weaker?”
*

388 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

“People can’t do things their ancestors could do.”
“What does the world look like if knowledge is being lost?”
“People don’t know how to cast the Charms in the ﬁrst place...” said
Draco. He stopped, surprised at himself. “That’s a test, isn’t it?”
Harry nodded decisively. “That’s one.” He wrote it down on the
parchment under Tests:
A. Are there spells we know but can’t cast (1 or 2) or are the lost spells no
longer known (3)?
“So that distinguishes between 1 and 2 on the one hand, and 3 on
the other hand,” said Harry. “Now we need some way to distinguish
between 1 and 2. Magic fading, blood weakening, how could we tell the
diﬀerence?”
“What kind of Charms did students used to cast in their ﬁrst year
at Hogwarts?” said Draco. “If they used to be able to cast much more
powerful Charms, the blood was stronger—”
Harry Potter shook his head. “Or magic itself was stronger. We have
to ﬁgure out some way of telling the diﬀerence.” Harry stood up from
his chair, began pacing nervously through the classroom. “No, wait,
that might still work. Suppose diﬀerent spells use up diﬀerent amounts
of magical energy. Then if the ambient magic weakened, the powerful
spells would die ﬁrst, but the spells everyone learns in their ﬁrst year
would stay the same...” Harry’s nervous pacing sped up. “It’s not a very
good test, it’s more about powerful wizardry being lost versus all wizardry being lost, someone’s blood could be too weak for powerful wizardry but strong enough for easy spells... Draco, do you know if more
powerful wizards within a single era, like powerful wizards from just this
century, are more powerful as children? If the Dark Lord had cast the
Cooling Charm when he was eleven, could he have frozen the whole
room?”
Draco’s face screwed up as he tried to recollect. “I can’t remember
hearing anything about the Dark Lord but I think Dumbledore’s supposed to have done something amazing on his Transﬁguration O.W.L.s
in ﬁfth year... I think other powerful wizards were good in Hogwarts
too...”
Harry scowled, still pacing. “They could just be studying hard. Still,
*

389 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

if ﬁrst-year students learned the same spells and seemed about as powerful then as now, we could call that weak evidence favoring 1 over 2...
wait, hold on.” Harry stopped where he stood. “I have another test that
might distinguish between 1 and 2. It would take a while to explain, it
uses some things that scientists know about blood and inheritance, but
it’s an easy question to ask. And if we combine my test and your test and
they both come out the same way, that’s a strong hint at the answer.”
Harry almost ran back to the desk, took the parchment and wrote:
B. Did ancient ﬁrst-year students cast the same sort of spells, with the
same power, as now? (Weak evidence for 1 over 2, but blood could also be
losing powerful wizardry only.)
C. Additional test that distinguishes 1 and 2 using scientiﬁc knowledge
of blood, will explain later.
“Okay,” said Harry, “we can at least try to tell the diﬀerence between
1 and 2 and 3, so let’s go with this right away, we can ﬁgure out more tests
after we do the ones we already have. Now it’s going to look a little odd
if Draco Malfoy and Harry Potter go around asking questions together,
so here’s my idea. You’ll go through Hogwarts and ﬁnd old portraits and
ask them about what spells they learned to cast during their ﬁrst years.
They’re portraits so they won’t know there’s anything odd about Draco
Malfoy doing that. I’ll ask recent portraits and living people about spells
we know but can’t cast, no one will notice anything unusual if Harry
Potter asks weird questions. And I’ll have to do complicated research
about forgotten spells, so I want you to be the one to gather the data
I need for my own scientiﬁc question. It’s a simple question and you
should be able to ﬁnd the answer by asking portraits. You might want
to write this down, ready?”
Draco sat down again and scrabbled in his bookbag for parchment
and quill. When it was laid down on the desk, Draco looked up, face
determined. “Go ahead.”
“Find portraits who knew a married Squib couple—don’t make that
face, Draco, it’s important information. Just ask recent portraits who
are Gryﬃndors or something. Find portraits who knew a married Squib
couple well enough to know the names of all their children. Write down
the name of each child and whether that child was a wizard, a Squib, or a
*

390 *

**
*

THE SCIENTIFIC METHOD

*
*

*

Muggle. If they don’t know whether the child was a Squib or a Muggle,
write down ‘non-wizard’. Write that down for every child the couple
had, don’t leave any out. If the portrait only knows the name of the
wizarding children, not the names of all the children, then don’t write
down any data from that couple. It’s very important that you only bring
me data from someone who knows all the children a Squib couple had,
well enough to know them all by name. Try to get at least forty names
total, if you can, and if you have time for more, even better. Have you
got all that?”
“Repeat it,” Draco said, when he was done writing, and Harry repeated it.
“I’ve got it,” Draco said, “but why—”
“It has to do with one of the secrets of blood that scientists already
discovered. I’ll explain when you get back. Let’s split up and meet back
here in an hour, 6:22pm that should be. Are we ready to go?”
Draco nodded decisively. It was all very rushed, but he’d long since
been taught how to rush.
“Then go!” said Harry Potter and yanked oﬀ his cowled cloak and
shoved it into his pouch, which began eating it, and, without even waiting for his pouch to ﬁnish, spun around and began striding rapidly toward the classroom door, bumping into a desk and almost falling over
in his haste.
By the time Draco had managed to get his own cloak oﬀ and stow it
in his bookbag, Harry Potter was gone.
Draco almost ran out the door.

*

391

*

CHAPTER

TWENT Y-THREE

BELIEF IN BELIEF
nd then Janet was a Squib,” said the portrait of a short young
woman with a gold-trimmed hat.
Draco wrote it down. That was only twenty-eight but it was time to
go back and meet Harry.
He’d needed to ask other portraits to help translating, English had
changed a lot, but the oldest portraits had described ﬁrst-year spells that
sounded an awful lot like the ones they had now. Draco had recognized
around half of them and the other half didn’t sound any more powerful.
The sick feeling in his stomach had grown with each answer until
ﬁnally, unable to take it any more, he’d gone oﬀ and asked other portraits
Harry Potter’s strange question about Squib marriages, instead. The ﬁrst
ﬁve portraits hadn’t known anyone and ﬁnally he’d asked those portraits
to ask their acquaintances to ask their acquaintances and so managed to
ﬁnd some people who’d actually admit to being friends with Squibs.
(The ﬁrst-year Slytherin had explained he was working on an important project with a Ravenclaw and the Ravenclaw had told him they
needed this information and then run oﬀ without saying why. This had
garnered many sympathetic looks.)
Draco’s feet were heavy as he walked through the corridors of Hogwarts. He should have been running but he couldn’t seem to muster the
energy. He kept on thinking that he didn’t want to know about this, he
didn’t want to be involved in any of this, he didn’t want this to be his
responsibility, just let Harry Potter do it, if magic was fading let Harry
Potter take care of it...
But Draco knew that wasn’t right.

“A

*

393 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Chill the dungeons of Slytherin, gray the stone walls, Draco usually
liked the atmosphere, but now it seemed too much like fading.
His hand on the doorknob, Harry Potter already inside and waiting,
wearing his cowled cloak.
“The ancient ﬁrst-year spells,” Harry Potter said. “What did you
ﬁnd?”
“They’re no more powerful than the spells we use now.”
Harry Potter’s ﬁst struck a desk, hard. “Damn it. All right. My own
experiment was a failure, Draco. There’s something called the Interdict
of Merlin—”
Draco hit himself on the forehead, realizing.
“—which stops anyone from getting knowledge of powerful spells
out of books, even if you ﬁnd and read a powerful wizard’s notes they
won’t make sense to you, it has to go from one living mind to another.
I couldn’t ﬁnd any powerful spells that we had the instructions for but
couldn’t cast. But if you can’t get them out of old books, why would
anyone bother passing them on by word of mouth after they stopped
working? Did you get the data on the Squib couples?”
Draco started to hand the parchment over—
But Harry Potter held up a hand. “Law of science, Draco. First I tell
you the theory and the prediction. Then you show me the data. That
way you know I’m not just making up a theory to ﬁt; you know that the
theory actually predicted the data in advance. I have to explain this to
you anyway, so I have to explain it before you show me the data. That’s
the rule. So put on your cloak and let’s sit down.”
Harry Potter sat down at a desk with torn scraps of paper arranged
across its surface. Draco drew his cloak out of his bookbag, drew it
on, and sat down across from Harry on the other side, giving the paper
scraps a puzzled look. They were arranged in two rows and the rows
were about twenty scraps long.
“The secret of blood,” said Harry Potter, an intense look on his face,
“is something called deoxyribose nucleic acid. You don’t say that name
in front of anyone who’s not a scientist. Deoxyribose nucleic acid is the
recipe that tells your body how to grow, two legs, two arms, short or tall,
whether you have brown eyes or green. It’s a material thing, you can see
*

394 *

**
*

BELIEF IN BELIEF

*
*

*

it if you have microscopes, which are like telescopes only they look at
things that are very small instead of very far away. And that recipe has
two copies of everything, always, in case one copy is broken. Imagine
two long rows of pieces of paper. At each place in the row, there are
two pieces of paper, and when you have children, your body selects one
piece of paper at random from each place in the row, and the mother’s
body will do the same, and so the child also gets two pieces of paper at
each place in the row. Two copies of everything, one from your mother,
one from your father, and when you have children they get one piece of
paper from you at random in each place.”
As Harry spoke, his ﬁngers ranged over the paired scraps of paper,
pointing to one part of the pair when he said “from your mother”, the
other when he said “from your father”. And as Harry talked about picking a piece of paper at random, his hand pulled a Knut out of his robes
and ﬂipped it; Harry looked at the coin, and then pointed to the top
piece of paper. All without a pause in the speech.
“Now when it comes to something like being short or tall, there’s a
lot of places in the recipe that make little diﬀerences. So if a tall father
marries a short mother, the child gets some pieces of paper saying ‘tall’
and some pieces of paper saying ‘short’, and usually the child ends up
middle-sized. But not always. By luck, the child might get a lot of pieces
saying ‘tall’, and not many papers saying ‘short’, and grow up pretty
tall. You could have a tall father with ﬁve papers saying ‘tall’ and a tall
mother with ﬁve papers saying ‘tall’ and by amazing luck the child gets
all ten papers saying ‘tall’ and ends up taller than both of them. You see?
Blood isn’t a perfect ﬂuid, it doesn’t mix perfectly. Deoxyribose nucleic
acid is made up of lots of little pieces, like a glass of pebbles instead of a
glass of water. That’s why a child isn’t always exactly in the middle of
the parents.”
Draco listened with his mouth open. How in Merlin’s name had the
Muggles ﬁgured all this out? They could see the recipe?
“Now,” Harry Potter said, “suppose that, just like with tallness,
there’s lots of little places in the recipe where you can have a piece of
paper that says ‘magic’ or ‘not magic’. If you have enough pieces of paper saying ‘magic’ you’re a wizard, if you have a lot of pieces of paper
*

395 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

you’re a powerful wizard, if you have too few you’re a Muggle, and in between you’re a Squib. Then, when two Squibs marry, most of the time
the children should also be Squibs, but once in a while a child will get
lucky and get most of the father’s magic papers and most of the mother’s
magic papers, and be strong enough to be a wizard. But probably not
a very powerful one. If you started out with a lot of powerful wizards
and they married only each other, they would stay powerful. But if
they started marrying Muggleborns who were just barely magical, or
Squibs... you see? The blood wouldn’t mix perfectly, it would be a glass
of pebbles, not a glass of water, because that’s just the way blood works.
There would still be powerful wizards now and then, when they got a
lot of magic papers by luck. But they wouldn’t be as powerful as the
most powerful wizards from earlier.”
Draco nodded slowly. He’d never heard it explained that way before.
There was a surprising beauty to how exactly it ﬁt.
“But,” Harry said. “That’s only one hypothesis. Suppose that instead
there’s only a single place in the recipe that makes you a wizard. Only
one place where a piece of paper can say ‘magic’ or ‘not magic’. And
there are two copies of everything, always. So then there are only three
possibilities. Both copies can say ‘magic’. One copy can say ‘magic’
and one copy can say ‘not magic’. Or both copies can say ‘not magic’.
Wizards, Squibs, and Muggles. Muggleborns wouldn’t really be born
to Muggles, they would be born to two Squibs, two parents each with
one magic copy who’d grown up in the Muggle world. Now imagine a
witch marries a Squib. Each child will get one paper saying ‘magic’ from
the mother, always, it doesn’t matter which piece gets picked at random,
both say ‘magic’. But like ﬂipping a coin, half the time the child will get
a paper saying ‘magic’ from the father, and half the time the child will
get the father’s paper saying ‘not magic’. When a witch marries a Squib,
the result won’t be a lot of weak wizarding children. Half the children
will be wizards and witches just as powerful as their mother, and half
the children will be Squibs. Because if there’s just one place in the recipe
that makes you a wizard, then magic isn’t like a glass of pebbles that can
mix. It’s like a single magical pebble, a sorcerer’s stone.”
Harry arranged three pairs of papers side by side. On one pair he
*

396 *

**
*

BELIEF IN BELIEF

*
*

*

wrote ‘magic’ and ‘magic’. On another pair he wrote ‘magic’ on the top
paper only. And the third pair he left blank.
“In which case,” Harry said, “either you have two stones or you
don’t. Either you’re a wizard or not. Powerful wizards would get that
way by studying harder and practicing more. And if wizards get inherently less powerful, not because of spells being lost but because people
can’t cast them... then maybe they’re eating the wrong foods or something. But if it’s gotten steadily worse over eight hundred years, then
that could mean magic itself is fading out of the world.”
Harry arranged another two pairs of papers side by side, and took
out a quill. Soon each pair had one piece of paper saying ‘magic’ and the
other paper blank.
“And that brings me to the prediction,” said Harry. “What happens
when two Squibs marry. Flip a coin twice. It can come up heads and
heads, heads and tails, tails and heads, or tails and tails. So one quarter
of the time you’ll get two heads, one quarter of the time you’ll get two
tails, and half the time you’ll get one heads and one tail. Same thing if
two Squibs marry. One quarter of the children would come up magic
and magic, and be wizards. One quarter would come up not-magic and
not-magic, and be Muggles. The other half would be Squibs. It’s a very
old and very classic pattern. It was discovered by Gregor Mendel who
is not forgotten, and it was the ﬁrst hint ever uncovered for how the
recipe worked. Anyone who knows anything about blood science would
recognize that pattern in an instant. It wouldn’t be exact, any more than
if you ﬂip a coin twice forty times you’ll always get exactly ten pairs of
two heads. But if it’s seven or thirteen wizards out of forty children
that’ll be a strong indicator. That’s the test I had you do. Now let’s see
your data.”
And before Draco could even think, Harry Potter had taken the
parchment out of Draco’s hand.
Draco’s throat was very dry.
Twenty-eight children.
He wasn’t sure of the exact number but he was pretty sure around a
fourth had been wizards.
“Six wizards out of twenty-eight children,” Harry Potter said after a
*

397 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

moment. “Well, that’s that, then. And ﬁrst-years were casting the same
spells at the same power level eight centuries ago, too. Your test and my
test both came out the same way.”
There was a long silence in the classroom.
“What now?” Draco whispered.
He’d never been so terriﬁed.
“It’s not deﬁnite yet,” said Harry Potter. “My experiment failed,
remember? I need you to design another test, Draco.”
“I, I...” Draco said. His voice was breaking. “I can’t do this Harry,
it’s too much for me.”
Harry’s look was ﬁerce. “Yes you can, because you have to. I thought
about it myself, too, after I found out about the Interdict of Merlin.
Draco, is there any way of observing the strength of magic directly?
Some way that doesn’t have anything to do with wizards’ blood or the
spells we learn?”
Draco’s mind was just blank.
“Anything that aﬀects magic aﬀects wizards,” said Harry. “But then
we can’t tell if it’s the wizards or the magic. What does magic aﬀect that
isn’t a wizard?”
“Magical creatures, obviously,” said Draco without even thinking
about it.
Harry Potter slowly smiled. “Draco, that’s brilliant.”
It’s the sort of dumb question you’d only ask in the ﬁrst place if you’d
been raised by Muggles.
Then the sickness in Draco’s stomach got even worse as he realized
what it would mean if magical creatures were getting weaker. They
would know for certain then that magic was fading, and there was a part
of Draco that was already sure that was exactly what they would ﬁnd.
He didn’t want to see this, he didn’t want to know...
Harry Potter was already halfway to the door. “Come on, Draco!
There’s a portrait not far from here, we’ll just ask them to go get someone old and ﬁnd out right away! We’re cloaked, if someone sees us we
can just run away! Let’s go!”

**
*
*

398 *

**
*

BELIEF IN BELIEF

*
*

*

It didn’t take long after that.
It was a wide portrait, but the three people in it were looking rather
crowded. There was a middle-aged man from the twelfth century,
dressed in black swathes of cloth; who spoke to a sad-looking young
woman from the fourteenth century, with hair that seemed to constantly
frizz about her head as if she’d been charged up by a static spell; and she
spoke to a digniﬁed, wizened old man from the seventeenth century with
a solid gold bowtie; and him they could understand.
They had asked about Dementors.
They had asked about phoenixes.
They had asked about dragons and trolls and house elves.
Harry had frowned, pointed out that creatures which needed the
most magic could just be dying out entirely, and had asked for the most
powerful magical creatures known.
There wasn’t anything unfamiliar on the list, except for a species of
Dark creature called mind ﬂayers which the translator noted had ﬁnally
been exterminated by Harold Shea, and those didn’t sound half as scary
as Dementors.
Magical creatures were as powerful now as they’d ever been, apparently.
The sickness in Draco’s stomach was easing, and now he just felt
confused.
“Harry,” Draco said in the middle of the old man translating a list of
all eleven powers of a beholder’s eyes, “what does this mean?”
Harry held up a ﬁnger and the old man ﬁnished the list.
Then Harry thanked all the portraits for helping—Draco, pretty
much on automatic, did so as well and more graciously—and they headed
back to the classroom.
And Harry brought out the original parchment with the hypotheses,
and began scribbling.

Observation:
Wizardry isn’t as powerful now as it was when Hogwarts was founded.
*

399 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Hypotheses:
1. Magic itself is fading.
2. Wizards are interbreeding with Muggles and Squibs.
3. Knowledge to cast powerful spells is being lost.
4. Wizards are eating the wrong foods as children, or something else besides
blood is making them grow up weaker.
5. Muggle technology is interfering with magic. (Since 800 years ago?)
6. Stronger wizards are having fewer children. (Draco = only child? Check
if 3 powerful wizards, Quirrell / Dumbledore / Dark Lord, had any children.)
Tests:
A. Are there spells we know but can’t cast (1 or 2) or are the lost spells no
longer known (3)? Result: Inconclusive due to Interdict of Merlin. No
known uncastable spell, but could simply have not been passed on.
B. Did ancient first-year students cast the same sort of spells, with the same
power, as now? (Weak evidence for 1 over 2, but blood could also be losing
powerful wizardry only.) Result: Same level of first-year spells then as
now.
C. Additional test that distinguishes 1 and 2 using scientific knowledge of
blood, will explain later. Result: There’s only one place in the recipe that
makes you a wizard, and either you have two papers saying ‘magic’ or you
don’t.
D. Are magical creatures losing their powers? Distinguishes 1 from (2 or 3).
Result: Magical creatures seem to be as strong as they ever were.
“A failed,” said Harry Potter. “B is weak evidence for 1 over 2. C
falsiﬁes 2. D falsiﬁes 1. 4 was unlikely and B argues against 4 as well.
5 was unlikely and D argues against it. 6 is falsiﬁed along with 2. That
*

400 *

**
*

BELIEF IN BELIEF

*
*

*

leaves 3. Interdict of Merlin or not, I didn’t actually ﬁnd any known spell
that couldn’t be cast. So when you add it all up, it looks like knowledge
is being lost.”
And the trap snapped shut.
As soon as the panic went away, as soon as Draco understood that
magic wasn’t fading out, it took all of ﬁve seconds to realize.
Draco shoved himself away from the desk and stood up so hard that
his chair skittered with a scraping noise across the ﬂoor and fell over.
“So it was all just a stupid trick, then.”
Harry Potter stared at him for a moment, still sitting. When he
spoke, his voice was quiet. “It was a fair test, Draco. If it had come
out a diﬀerent way, I would have accepted it. That’s not something I
would ever cheat on. Ever. I didn’t look at your data before I made my
predictions. I told you up front when the Interdict of Merlin invalidated
the ﬁrst experiment—”
“Oh,” Draco said, the anger starting to come out into his voice, “you
didn’t know how the whole thing was going to come out?”
“I didn’t know anything you didn’t know,” Harry said, still quietly.
“I admit that I suspected. Hermione Granger was too powerful, she
should have been barely magical and she wasn’t, how can a Muggleborn be the best spellcaster in Hogwarts? And she’s getting the best
grades on her essays too, it’s too much coincidence for one girl to be the
strongest magically and academically unless there’s a single cause. Hermione Granger’s existence pointed to there being only one thing that
makes you a wizard, something you either have or you don’t, and the
power diﬀerences coming from how much we know and how much we
practice. And there weren’t diﬀerent classes for purebloods and Muggleborns, and so on. There were too many ways the world didn’t look the
way it would look if you were right. But Draco, I didn’t see anything
you couldn’t see too. I didn’t perform any tests I didn’t tell you about. I
didn’t cheat, Draco. I wanted us to work out the answer together. And
I never thought that magic might be fading out of the world until you
said it. It was a scary idea for me, too.”
“Whatever,” Draco said. He was working very hard to control his
voice and not just start screaming at Harry. “You claim you’re not going
*

401 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

to run oﬀ and tell anyone else about this.”
“Not without consulting you ﬁrst,” Harry said. He opened his hands
in a pleading gesture. “Draco, I’m being as nice as I can but the world
turned out to just not be that way.”
“Fine. Then you and I are through. I’m going to just walk away and
forget any of this ever happened.”
Draco spun around, feeling the burning sensation in his throat, the
sense of betrayal, and that was when he realized he really had liked Harry
Potter, and that thought didn’t slow him down for a moment as he strode
toward the classroom door.
And Harry Potter’s voice came, now louder, and worried:
“Draco... you can’t forget. Don’t you understand? That was your
sacriﬁce.”
Draco stopped in midstride and turned around. “What are you talking about?”
But there was already a freezing coldness in Draco’s spine.
He knew even before Harry Potter said it.
“To become a scientist. You questioned one of your beliefs, not just
a small belief but something that had great signiﬁcance to you. You
did experiments, gathered data, and the outcome proved the belief was
wrong. You saw the results and understood what they meant.” Harry
Potter’s voice was faltering. “Remember, Draco, you can’t sacriﬁce a
true belief that way, because the experiments will conﬁrm it instead of
falsifying it. Your sacriﬁce to become a scientist was your false belief that
wizard blood was mixing and getting weaker.”
“That’s not true!” said Draco. “I didn’t sacriﬁce the belief. I still believe that!” His voice was getting louder, and the chill was getting worse.
Harry Potter shook his head. His voice came in a whisper. “Draco...
I’m sorry, Draco, you don’t believe it, not anymore.” Harry’s voice rose
again. “I’ll prove it to you. Imagine that someone tells you they’re keeping a dragon in their house. You tell them you want to see it. They
say it’s an invisible dragon. You say ﬁne, you’ll listen to it move. They
say it’s an inaudible dragon. You say you’ll throw some cooking ﬂour
into the air and see the outline of the dragon. They say the dragon is
permeable to ﬂour. And the telling thing is that they know, in advance,
*

402 *

**
*

BELIEF IN BELIEF

*
*

*

exactly which experimental results they’ll have to explain away. They
know everything will come out the way it does if there’s no dragon, they
know in advance just which excuses they’ll have to make. So maybe they
say there’s a dragon. Maybe they believe they believe there’s a dragon,
it’s called belief-in-belief. But they don’t actually believe it. You can
be mistaken about what you believe, most people never realize there’s
a diﬀerence between believing something and thinking it’s good to believe it.” Harry Potter had risen from the desk now, and taken a few
steps toward Draco. “And Draco, you don’t believe any more in blood
purism, I’ll show you that you don’t. If blood purism is true, then Hermione Granger doesn’t make sense, so what could explain her? Maybe
she’s a wizarding orphan raised by Muggles, just like I was? I could go
to Granger and ask to see pictures of her parents, to see if she looks like
them. Would you expect her to look diﬀerent? Should we go perform
that test?”
“They would have put her with relatives,” Draco said, his voice trembling. “They’ll still look the same.”
“You see. You already know what experimental result you’ll have to
excuse. If you still believed in blood purism you would say, sure, let’s go
take a look, I bet she won’t look like her parents, she’s too powerful to
be a real Muggleborn—”
“They would have put her with relatives!”
“Scientists can do tests to check for sure if someone is the true child
of a father. Granger would probably do it if I paid her family enough.
She wouldn’t be afraid of the results. So what do you expect that test to
show? Tell me to run it and we will. But you already know what the
test will say. You’ll always know. You won’t ever be able to forget. You
might wish you believed in blood purism, but you’ll always expect to see
happen just exactly what would happen if there was only one thing that
made you a wizard. That was your sacriﬁce to become a scientist.”
Draco’s breathing was ragged. “Do you realize what you’ve done?”
Draco surged forward and he seized Harry by the collar of his robes.
His voice rose to a scream, it sounded unbearably loud in the closed
classroom and the silence. “Do you realize what you’ve done?”
Harry’s voice was shaky. “You had a belief. The belief was false. I
*

403 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

helped you see that. What’s true is already so, owning up to it doesn’t
make it worse—”
The ﬁngers on Draco’s right hand clenched into a ﬁst and that hand
dropped down and blasted up unstoppably and punched Harry Potter
in the jaw so hard that his body went crashing back into a desk and then
to the ﬂoor.
“Idiot!” screamed Draco. “Idiot! Idiot!”
“Draco,” whispered Harry from the ﬂoor, “Draco, I’m sorry, I didn’t
think this would happen for months, I didn’t expect you to awaken as a
scientist this quickly, I thought I would have longer to prepare you, teach
you the techniques that make it hurt less to admit you’re wrong—”
“What about Father?” Draco said. His voice trembled with rage.
“Were you going to prepare him or did you just not care what happened
after this?”
“You can’t tell him!” Harry said, his voice rising in alarm. “He’s not
a scientist! You promised, Draco!”
For a moment the thought of Father not knowing came as a relief.
And then the real anger started to rise.
“So you planned for me to lie to him and tell him I still believe,”
Draco said, voice shaking. “I’ll always have to lie to him, and now when
I grow up I can’t be a Death Eater, and I won’t even be able to tell him
why not.”
“If your father really loves you,” whispered Harry from the ﬂoor,
“he’ll still love you even if you don’t become a Death Eater, and it sounds
like your father does really love you, Draco—”
“Your stepfather is a scientist,” Draco said. The words coming out
like biting knives. “If you weren’t going to be a scientist, he would still
love you. But you’d be a little less special to him.”
Harry ﬂinched. The boy opened his mouth, as if to say ‘I’m sorry’,
and then closed his mouth, seeming to think better of it, which was
either very smart of him or very lucky, because Draco might have tried
to kill him.
“You should have warned me,” Draco said. His voice rose. “You
should have warned me!”
“I... I did... every time I told you about the power, I told you about
*

404 *

**
*

BELIEF IN BELIEF

*
*

*

the price. I said, you have to admit you’re wrong. I said this would be
the hardest path for you. That this was the sacriﬁce anyone had to make
to become a scientist. I said, what if the experiment says one thing and
your family and friends say another—”
“You call that a warning?” Draco was screaming now. “You call that
a warning? When we’re doing a ritual that calls for a permanent sacriﬁce?”
“I... I...” The boy on the ﬂoor swallowed. “I guess maybe it wasn’t
clear. I’m sorry. But that which can be destroyed by the truth should
be.”
Hitting him wasn’t enough.
“You’re wrong about one thing,” Draco said, his voice deadly.
“Granger isn’t the strongest student in Hogwarts. She just gets the best
grades in class. You’re about to ﬁnd out the diﬀerence.”
Sudden shock showed in Harry’s face, and he tried to roll quickly to
his feet—
It was already too late for him.
“Expelliarmus!”
Harry’s wand ﬂew across the room.
“Gom jabbar!”
A pulse of inky blackness struck Harry’s left hand.
“That’s a torture spell,” said Draco. “It’s for getting information out
of people. I’m just going to leave it on you and lock the door behind me
when I go. Maybe I’ll set the locking spell to wear oﬀ after a few hours.
Maybe it won’t wear oﬀ until you die in here. Have fun.”
Draco moved smoothly backward, wand still on Harry. Draco’s
hand dipped down, picked up his bookbag, without his aim wavering.
The pain was already showing in Harry Potter’s face as he spoke.
“Malfoys are above the underage magic laws, I take it? It’s not because
your blood is stronger. It’s because you already practiced. In the beginning you were as weak as any of us. Is my prediction wrong?”
Draco’s hand whitened on his wand, but his aim stayed steady.
“Just so you know,” Harry said through gritted teeth, “if you’d told
me I was wrong I would have listened. I won’t ever torture you when
you show me that I’m wrong. And you will. Someday. You’re awakened
as a scientist now, and even if you never learn to use your power, you’ll
*

405 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

always,” Harry gasped, “be looking, for ways, to test, your beliefs—”
Draco’s backing away was less smooth, now, a little faster, and he had
to work to keep his wand on Harry as he reached back to open the door
and stepped back out of the classroom.
Then Draco shut the door again.
He cast the most powerful locking Charm he knew.
Draco waited until he heard Harry’s ﬁrst scream before casting the
Quietus.
And then he walked away.

**
*
“Aaahhhhh! Finite Incantatem! Aaaahhh!”
Harry’s left hand had been put into a pot of boiling cooking oil and
left there. He’d put everything he had into the Finite Incantatem and it
still wasn’t working.
Some hexes required speciﬁc counters or you couldn’t undo them,
or maybe it was just that Draco was that much stronger.
“Aaaaahhhh!”
Harry’s hand was really starting to hurt, now, and that was interfering with his attempts to think creatively.
But a few screams later, Harry realized what he had to do.
His pouch, unfortunately, was on the wrong side of his body, and it
took some twisting to reach into it, especially with his other arm ﬂailing
around in a reﬂex, unstoppable attempt to ﬂing oﬀ the source of pain.
“Medical ahhhhh kit! Medical kit!”
On the ﬂoor, the green light was too dim to see by.
Harry couldn’t stand. He couldn’t crawl. He rolled across the ﬂoor
to where he thought his wand was, and it wasn’t there, and with one
hand he managed to raise himself high enough to see his wand, and he
rolled there, and got the wand, and rolled back to where the medical
kit was opened. There was also a good deal of screaming, and a bit of
throwing up.
It took eight tries before Harry could cast Lumos.
*

406 *

**
*

BELIEF IN BELIEF

*
*

*

And then, well, the package wasn’t designed to be opened onehanded, because all wizards were idiots, that was why. Harry had to
use his teeth and so it took a while before Harry ﬁnally managed to
wrap the Numbcloth over his left hand.
When all feeling in his left hand was ﬁnally gone, Harry let his mind
come apart, and lay motionless on the ﬂoor, and cried for a while.
Well, Harry’s mind said silently into itself, when it had recovered
enough to think in words again. Was it worth it?
Slowly, Harry’s functional hand reached up to a desk.
Harry pulled himself to his feet.
Took a deep breath.
Exhaled.
Smiled.
It wasn’t much of a smile, but it was a smile nonetheless.
Thank you, Professor Quirrell, I couldn’t have lost without you.
He hadn’t redeemed Draco yet, not even close. Contrary to what
Draco himself might now believe, Draco was still the child of a Death
Eater, through and through. Still a boy who’d grown up thinking “rape”
was something the cool older kids did. But it was one heck of a start.
Harry couldn’t claim it had all gone just as planned. It had all gone
just as completely made up on the spot. The plan hadn’t called for this
to happen until December or thereabouts, after Harry had taught Draco
the techniques not to deny the evidence when he saw it.
But he’d seen the look of fear on Draco’s face, realized that Draco
was already taking an alternative hypothesis seriously, and seized the moment. One case of true curiosity had the same sort of redeeming power
in rationality that one case of true love had in movies.
In retrospect, Harry had given himself hours to make the most important discovery in the history of magic, and months to break through
the undeveloped mental barriers of an eleven-year-old boy. This could
indicate that Harry had some sort of major cognitive deﬁcit with respect
to estimating task completion times.
Was Harry going to Science Hell for what he’d done? Harry wasn’t
sure. He’d contrived to keep Draco’s mind on the possibility that magic
was fading, made sure Draco would carry out the part of the experiment
*

407 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

that would seem at ﬁrst to point in that direction. He’d waited until after
explaining genetics to prompt Draco into realizing about magical creatures (though Harry had thought in terms of ancient artifacts like the
Sorting Hat, which no one could duplicate anymore, but which continued to function). But Harry hadn’t actually exaggerated any evidence,
hadn’t distorted the meaning of any results. When the Interdict of Merlin had invalidated the test that should have been deﬁnitive, he’d told
Draco up front.
And then there was the part after that...
But he hadn’t actually lied to Draco. Draco had believed it, and that
would make it true.
The end, admittedly, had not been fun.
Harry turned, and staggered toward the door.
Time to test Draco’s locking spell.
The ﬁrst step was simply trying to turn the doorknob. Draco could
have been bluﬃng.
Draco hadn’t been bluﬃng.
“Finite Incantatem.” Harry’s voice came out rather hoarse, and he
could feel that the spell hadn’t taken.
So Harry tried it again, and that time it felt true. But another twist
at the doorknob showed it hadn’t worked. No surprise there.
Time to bring out the big guns. Harry drew a deep breath. This spell
was one of the most powerful he’d learned so far.
“Alohomora!”
Harry staggered a little after saying it.
And the classroom door still didn’t open.
That shocked Harry. Harry hadn’t been planning to go anywhere
near Dumbledore’s forbidden corridor, of course. But a spell to open
magical locks had seemed like a useful sort of spell anyway, and so Harry
had learned it. Was Dumbledore’s forbidden corridor meant to lure people so stupid that they didn’t notice the security was worse than what
Draco Malfoy could put on it?
Fear was creeping back into Harry’s system. The placard in the medical kit had said the Numbcloth could only safely be used for up to thirty
minutes. After that it would come oﬀ automatically, and not be reusable
*

408 *

**
*

BELIEF IN BELIEF

*
*

*

for 24 hours. Right now it was 6:51pm. He’d put on the Numbcloth
about ﬁve minutes ago.
So Harry took a step back, and considered the door. It was a solid
panel of dark oaken wood, interrupted only by the brass metal doorknob.
Harry didn’t know any explosive or cutting or smashing spells, and
Transﬁguring explosive would have violated the rule against Transﬁguring things to be burned. Acid was a liquid and would have made fumes...
But that was no obstacle to a creative thinker.
Harry laid his wand against one of the door’s brass hinges, and concentrated on the form of cotton as a pure abstraction apart from any material cotton, and also on the pure material apart from the pattern that
made it a brass hinge, and brought the two concepts together, imposing
shape on substance. An hour of Transﬁguration practice every day for
a month had gotten Harry to the point where he could Transﬁgure a
subject of ﬁve cubic centimeters in just under a minute.
After two minutes the hinge hadn’t changed at all.
Whoever had designed Draco’s locking spell, they’d thought of that,
too. Or the door was part of Hogwarts and the castle was immune.
A glance showed the walls to be solid stone. So was the ﬂoor. So was
the ceiling. You couldn’t separately Transﬁgure a part of something that
was a solid whole; Harry would have needed to try Transﬁguring the
whole wall, which would have taken hours or maybe days of continuous
eﬀort, if he could have done it at all, and if the wall wasn’t contiguous
with the rest of the whole castle...
Harry’s Time-Turner wouldn’t open until 9pm. After that he could
go back to 6pm, before the door was locked.
How long would the torture spell last?
Harry swallowed hard. Tears were coming into his eyes again.
His brilliantly creative mind had just oﬀered the ingenious suggestion that Harry could cut his hand oﬀ using the hacksaw in the toolset
stored in his pouch, which would hurt, obviously, but might hurt a lot
less than Draco’s pain spell, since the nerves would be gone; and he had
tourniquets in the healer’s kit.
And that was obviously a hideously stupid idea that Harry would
*

409 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

regret the rest of his entire life.
But Harry didn’t know if he could hold out for two hours under
torture.
He wanted out of this classroom, he wanted out of this classroom
now, he didn’t want to wait in here screaming for two hours until he
could use the Time-Turner, he needed to get out and ﬁnd someone to get
the torture spell oﬀ his hand...
Think! Harry screamed at his brain. Think! Think!

**
*
The Slytherin dorm was mostly empty. People were at dinner. For some
reason Draco himself wasn’t feeling very hungry.
Draco closed the door to his private room, locked it, Charmed it
shut, Quieted it, sat down on his bed, and started to cry.
It wasn’t fair.
It wasn’t fair.
It was the ﬁrst time Draco had ever really lost before, Father had
warned him that losing for real would hurt the ﬁrst time it happened, but
he’d lost so much, it wasn’t fair, it wasn’t fair for him to lose everything
the very ﬁrst time he lost.
Somewhere in the dungeons, a boy Draco had actually liked was
screaming in pain. Draco had never hurt anyone he’d liked before. Punishing people who deserved it was supposed to be fun, but this just felt
sick inside. Father hadn’t warned him about that, and Draco wondered
if it was a hard lesson everyone had to learn when they grew up, or if
Draco was just weak.
Draco wished it were Pansy screaming. That would have felt better.
And the worst part was knowing that it might have been a mistake
to hurt Harry Potter.
Who else was there for Draco now? Dumbledore? After what he’d
done? Draco would sooner have been burned alive.
Draco would have to go back to Harry Potter because there was
nowhere else for him to go. And if Harry Potter said he didn’t want
*

410

*

**
*

BELIEF IN BELIEF

*
*

*

him, then Draco would be nothing, just a pathetic little boy who could
never be a Death Eater, never join Dumbledore’s faction, never learn
science.
The trap had been perfectly set, perfectly executed. Father had
warned Draco over and over that what you sacriﬁced to Dark rituals
couldn’t be regained. But Father hadn’t known that the accursed Muggles had invented rituals that didn’t need wands, rituals you could be
tricked into doing without knowing it, and that was only one of the terrible secrets which scientists knew and which Harry Potter had brought
with him.
Draco started crying harder, then.
He didn’t want this, he didn’t want this but there was no turning
back. It was too late. He was already a scientist.
Draco knew he should go back and free Harry Potter and apologize.
It would have been the smart thing to do.
Instead Draco stayed in his bed and sobbed.
He’d already hurt Harry Potter. It might be the only time Draco
ever got to hurt him, and he would have to hold to that one memory for
the rest of his life.
Let him keep screaming.

**
*
Harry dropped the remnants of his hacksaw to the ground. The brass
hinges had proved impervious, not even scratched, and Harry was beginning to suspect that even the desperation act of trying to Transﬁgure
acid or explosives would have failed to open this door. On the plus side,
the attempt had destroyed the hacksaw.
His watch said it was 7:02pm, with less than ﬁfteen minutes left, and
Harry tried to remember if there were any other sharp things in his
pouch that needed destroying, and felt another ﬁt of tears welling up. If
only, when his Time-Turner opened, he could go back and prevent—
And that was when Harry realized he was being silly.
It wasn’t the ﬁrst time he’d been locked in a room.
*

411

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Professor McGonagall had already told him the correct way to do
this.
...she’d also told him not to use the Time-Turner for this sort of thing.
Would Professor McGonagall realize that this occasion really did
warrant a special exception? Or just take away the Time-Turner entirely?
Harry gathered up all his things, all the evidence, into his pouch. A
Scourgify took care of the vomit on the ﬂoor, though not the sweat that
had soaked his robes. He left the overturned desks overturned, it wasn’t
important enough to be worth doing with one hand.
When he was done, Harry glanced down at his watch. 7:04pm.
And then Harry waited. Seconds passed, feeling like years.
At 7:07pm, the door opened.
Professor Flitwick’s puﬀ-bearded face looked rather concerned. “Are
you all right, Harry?” said the squeaky voice of Ravenclaw’s Head of
House. “I got a note saying you’d been locked in here—”

*

412

*

CHAPTER

TWENT Y-FOUR

MACHIAV ELLIAN
INTELLIGENCE
H YPOTHESIS
Act 3:
raco waited in a small windowed alcove he’d found near the Great
Hall, stomach churning.
There would be a price, and it would not be small. Draco had known
that as soon as he’d woken up and realized that he didn’t dare enter the
Great Hall for breakfast because he might see Harry Potter there and
Draco didn’t know what would happen after that.
Footsteps approached.
“Here ya go,” said Vincent’s voice. “Now da boss ain’t in a good
mood today, so ya’d better watch your step.”
Draco was going to skin that idiot alive and send back the ﬂayed body
with a request for a more intelligent servant, like a dead gerbil.
One set of footsteps went oﬀ, and the other set of footsteps came
closer.
The churning in Draco’s stomach got worse.
Harry Potter came into sight. His face was carefully neutral, but his
blue-trimmed robes looked oddly askew, as if they hadn’t been put on
quite right—
“Your hand,” Draco said without thinking about it at all.
Harry raised his left arm, as though to look at it himself.
The hand dangled limply from it, like something dead.

D

*

413

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

“Madam Pomfrey said it’s not permanent,” Harry said quietly. “She
said it should mostly recover by the time classes start tomorrow.”
For a single instant the news came as a relief.
And then Draco realized.
“You went to Madam Pomfrey,” whispered Draco.
“Of course I did,” said Harry Potter, as though stating the obvious.
“My hand wasn’t working.”
It was slowly dawning on Draco what an absolute fool he’d been, far
worse than the older Slytherins he’d chewed out.
He’d just taken for granted that no one would go to the authorities
when a Malfoy did something to them. That no one would want Lucius
Malfoy’s eye on them, ever.
But Harry Potter wasn’t a frightened little Huﬄepuﬀ trying to stay
out of the game. He was already playing it, and Father’s eye was already
on him.
“What else did Madam Pomfrey say?” said Draco, his heart in his
throat.
“Professor Flitwick said that the spell cast on my hand had been a
Dark torture hex and extremely serious business, and that refusing to
say who did it was absolutely unacceptable.”
There was a long pause.
“And then?” Draco said in a shaking voice.
Harry Potter smiled slightly. “I apologized deeply, which made Professor Flitwick look very stern, and then I told Professor Flitwick that
the whole thing was, indeed, extremely serious, secret, delicate business,
and that I’d already informed the Headmaster about the project.”
Draco gasped. “No! Flitwick isn’t going to just accept that! He’ll
check with Dumbledore!”
“Indeed,” said Harry Potter. “I was promptly hauled oﬀ to the Headmaster’s oﬃce.”
Draco was trembling now. If Dumbledore brought Harry Potter
before the Wizengamot, willingly or otherwise, and had the Boy-WhoLived testify under Veritaserum that Draco had tortured him... too many
people loved Harry Potter, Father could lose that vote...
Father might be able to convince Dumbledore not to do that, but
*

414

*

**
*

MACHIAV ELLIAN INTELLIGENCE
H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

it would cost. Cost terribly. The game had rules now, you couldn’t
just threaten someone at random any more. But Draco had walked into
Dumbledore’s hands of his own free will. And Draco was a very valuable
hostage.
Though since Draco couldn’t be a Death Eater now, he wasn’t as
valuable as Father thought.
The thought tore at his heart like a Cutting Charm.
“Then what?” whispered Draco.
“Dumbledore deduced immediately that it was you. He knew we’d
been associating.”
The worst possible scenario. If Dumbledore hadn’t guessed who did
it, he might not have risked using Legilimency just to ﬁnd out... but if
Dumbledore knew...
“And?” Draco forced out the word.
“We had a little chat.”
“And?”
Harry Potter grinned. “And I explained that it would be in his best
interest not to do anything.”
Draco’s mind ran into a brick wall and splattered. He just stared at
Harry Potter with his mouth hanging slack like a fool.
It took that long for Draco to remember.
Harry knew Dumbledore’s mysterious secret, the one Snape used as
his hold.
Draco could just see it now. Dumbledore looking all stern, concealing his eagerness as he explained to Harry what a terribly serious matter
this was.
And Harry politely telling Dumbledore to keep his mouth shut if he
knew what was good for him.
Father had warned Draco against people like this, people who could
ruin you and still be so likable that it was hard to hate them properly.
“After which,” Harry said, “the Headmaster told Professor Flitwick
that this was, indeed, a secret and delicate matter of which he had already
been informed, and that he did not think pressing it at this time would
help me or anyone. Professor Flitwick started to say something about
the Headmaster’s usual plotting going much too far, and I had to inter*

415

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

rupt at that point and explain that it had been my own idea and not anything the Headmaster forced me into, so Professor Flitwick spun around
and started lecturing me, and the Headmaster interrupted him and said
that as the Boy-Who-Lived I was doomed to have weird and dangerous
adventures so I was safer if I got into them on purpose instead of waiting
for them to happen by accident, and that was when Professor Flitwick
threw up his little hands and started shrieking in a high-pitched voice at
both of us about how he didn’t care what we were cooking up together,
but this wasn’t ever to happen again for as long as I was in Ravenclaw
House or he would have me thrown out and I could go to Gryﬃndor
which was where all this Dumbledoring belonged—”
Harry was making it very hard for Draco to hate him.
“Anyway,” Harry said, “I didn’t want to be thrown out of Ravenclaw,
so I promised Professor Flitwick that nothing like this would happen
again, and if it did, I would just tell him who did it.”
Harry’s eyes should have been cold. They weren’t. The voice should
have made it a deadly threat. It wasn’t.
And Draco saw the question that should have been obvious, and it
killed the mood in an instant.
“Why... didn’t you?”
Harry walked over to the window, into the small beam of sunlight
shining into the alcove, and turned his head outward, toward the green
grounds of Hogwarts. The brightness shone on him, on his robes, on
his face.
“Why didn’t I?” Harry said. His voice caught. “I guess because I just
couldn’t get angry at you. I knew I’d hurt you ﬁrst. I won’t even call it
fair, because what I did to you was worse than what you did to me.”
It was like running into another brick wall. Harry could have been
speaking archaic Greek for all Draco understood him then.
Draco’s mind scrabbled for patterns and came up ﬂat blank. The
statement was a concession that hadn’t been in Harry’s best interests.
It wasn’t even what Harry should say to make Draco a more loyal servant, now that Harry held power over him. For that Harry should be
emphasizing how kindly he’d been, not how much he’d hurt Draco.
“Even so,” Harry said, and now his voice was lower, almost a whis*

416

*

**
*

MACHIAV ELLIAN INTELLIGENCE
H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

per, “please don’t do that again, Draco. It hurt, and I’m not sure I could
forgive you a second time. I’m not sure I’d be able to want to.”
Draco just didn’t get it.
Was Harry trying to be friends with him?
There was no way Harry Potter could be dumb enough to believe
that was still possible after what he’d done.
You could be someone’s friend and ally, like Draco had tried to do
with Harry, or you could destroy their life and leave them no other
options. Not both.
But then Draco didn’t understand what else Harry could be trying.
And a strange thought came to Draco then, something Harry had
kept talking about yesterday.
And the thought was: Test it.
You’re awakened as a scientist now, Harry had said, and even if you
never learn to use your power, you’ll always, be looking, for ways, to test,
your beliefs... Those ominous words, spoken in gasps of agony, had kept
running through Draco’s mind.
If Harry was pretending to be the repentant friend who had accidentally hurt someone...
“You planned what you did to me!” Draco said, managing to put a
note of accusation in his voice. “You didn’t do it because you got angry,
you did it because you wanted to!”
Fool, Harry Potter would say, of course I planned it, and now you’re
mine—
Harry turned back toward Draco. “What happened yesterday wasn’t
the plan,” Harry said, his voice seeming stuck in his throat. “The plan
was that I would teach you why you were always better oﬀ knowing the
truth, and then we would try together to discover the truth about blood,
and whatever the answer was we would accept it. Yesterday I... rushed
things.”
“Always better oﬀ knowing the truth,” Draco said coldly. “Like you
did me a favor.”
Harry nodded, blowing Draco’s mind completely, and said, “What
if Lucius comes up with the same idea I did, that the problem is stronger
wizards having fewer children? He might start a program to pay the
*

417

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

strongest purebloods to have more children. In fact, if blood purism were
right, that’s just what Lucius should be doing—addressing the problem
on his side, where he can make things happen right away. Right now,
Draco, you’re the only friend Lucius has who would try to stop him
from wasting the eﬀort, because you’re the only one who knows the
real truth and can predict the real results.”
The thought came to Draco that Harry Potter had been raised in
a place so strange that he was now eﬀectively a magical creature rather
than a wizard. Draco simply couldn’t guess what Harry would say or
do next.
“Why?” Draco said. Putting pain and betrayal into his voice wasn’t
hard at all. “Why did you do this to me? What was your plan?”
“Well,” Harry said, “you’re Lucius’s heir, and believe it or not, Dumbledore thinks I belong to him. So we could grow up and ﬁght their
battles with each other. Or we could do something else.”
Slowly, Draco’s mind wrapped around this. “You want to provoke
a ﬁght to the ﬁnish between them, then seize power after they’re both
exhausted.” Draco felt cold dread in his chest. He would have to try and
stop that no matter the cost to himself—
But Harry shook his head. “Stars above, no!”
“No...?”
“You wouldn’t go along with that and neither would I,” said Harry.
“This is our world, we don’t want to break it. But imagine, say, Lucius
thought the Conspiracy was your tool and you were on his side, Dumbledore thought the Conspiracy was my tool and I was on his side, Lucius
thought that you’d turned me and Dumbledore believed the Conspiracy
was mine, Dumbledore thought that I’d turned you and Lucius believed
the Conspiracy was yours, and so they both helped us out but only in
ways that the other one wouldn’t notice.”
Draco did not have to fake being speechless.
Father had once taken him to see a play called The Tragedy of Light,
about this incredibly clever Slytherin named Light who’d set out to purify the world of evil using an ancient ring that could kill anyone whose
name and face he knew, and who’d been opposed by another incredibly clever Slytherin, a villain named Lawliet, who’d worn a disguise to
*

418

*

**
*

MACHIAV ELLIAN INTELLIGENCE
H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

conceal his true face; and Draco had shouted and cheered at all the right
parts, especially in the middle; and then the play had ended sadly and
Draco had been hugely disappointed and Father had gently pointed out
that the word ‘Tragedy’ was right there in the title.
Afterward, Father had asked Draco if he understood why they had
gone to see this play.
Draco had said it was to teach him to be as cunning as Light and
Lawliet when he grew up.
Father had said that Draco couldn’t possibly be more wrong, and
pointed out that while Lawliet had cleverly concealed his face there had
been no good reason for him to tell Light his name. Father had then gone
on to demolish almost every part of the play, while Draco listened with
his eyes growing wider and wider. And Father had ﬁnished by saying
that plays like this were always unrealistic, because if the playwright had
known what someone actually as smart as Light would actually do, the
playwright would have tried to take over the world himself instead of
just writing plays about it.
That was when Father had told Draco about the Rule of Three,
which was that any plot which required more than three diﬀerent things
to happen would never work in real life.
Father had further explained that since only a fool would attempt a
plot that was as complicated as possible, the real limit was two.
Draco couldn’t even ﬁnd words to describe the sheer gargantuan unworkability of Harry’s master plan.
But it was just the sort of mistake you would make if you didn’t have
any mentors and thought you were clever and had learned about plotting
by watching plays.
“So,” said Harry, “what do you think of the plan?”
“It’s clever...” Draco said slowly. Shouting brilliant! and gasping in
awe would have looked too suspicious. “Harry, can I ask a question?”
“Sure,” said Harry.
“Why did you buy Granger an expensive pouch?”
“To show no hard feelings,” said Harry at once. “Though I expect
she’ll also feel awkward if she refuses any small requests I make over the
next couple of months.”
*

419

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

And that was when Draco realized that Harry actually was trying to
be his friend.
Harry’s move against Granger had been smart, maybe even brilliant.
Make your enemy not suspect you, and put them into your debt in a
friendly way so that you could maneuver them into position just by asking them. Draco couldn’t have gotten away with that, his target would
have been too suspicious, but the Boy-Who-Lived could. So the ﬁrst
step of Harry’s plot was to give his enemy an expensive present, Draco
wouldn’t have thought of that, but it could work...
If you were Harry’s enemy, his plots might be hard to see through
at ﬁrst, they might even be stupid, but his reasoning would make sense
once you understood it, you would comprehend that he was trying to
hurt you.
The way Harry was acting toward Draco right now did not make
sense.
Because if you were Harry’s friend, then he tried to be friends with
you in the alien, incomprehensible way he’d been raised by Muggles to
do, even if it meant destroying your entire life.
The silence stretched.
“I know that I’ve abused our friendship terribly,” Harry said ﬁnally.
“But please realize, Draco, that in the end, I just wanted the two of us to
ﬁnd the truth together. Is that something you can forgive?”
A fork with two paths, but with only one path easy to go back on
later if Draco changed his mind...
“I guess I understand what you were trying to do,” Draco lied, “so
yes.”
Harry’s eyes lit up. “I’m glad to hear that, Draco,” he said softly.
The two students stood in that alcove, Harry still dipped in the lone
sunbeam, Draco in shadow.
And Draco realized with a note of horror and despair, that although
it was a terrifying fate indeed to be Harry’s friend, Harry now had
so many diﬀerent avenues for threatening Draco that being his enemy
would be even worse.
Probably.
Maybe.
*

420 *

**
*

MACHIAV ELLIAN INTELLIGENCE
H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

Well, he could always switch to being enemies later...
He was doomed.
“So,” Draco said. “Now what?”
“We study again next Saturday?”
“It better not go like the last one—”
“Don’t worry, it won’t,” said Harry. “A few more Saturdays like that
and you’d be ahead of me.”
Harry laughed. Draco didn’t.
“Oh, and before you go,” Harry said, and grinned sheepishly. “I
know this is a bad time, but I wanted to ask you for advice about something, actually.”
“Okay,” Draco said, still a bit distracted by that last statement.
Harry’s eyes grew intent. “Buying that pouch for Granger used up
most of the gold I managed to steal from my Gringotts vault—”
What.
“—and McGonagall has the vault key, or Dumbledore does now,
maybe. And I was just about to launch a plot that might take some
money, so I was wondering if you know how I can get access—”
“I’ll loan you the money,” said Draco’s mouth in sheer existential
reﬂex.
Harry looked taken aback, but in a pleased way. “Draco, you don’t
have to—”
“How much?”
Harry named the amount and Draco couldn’t quite keep the shock
from showing on his face. That was almost all the spending money Father had given Draco to last out the whole year, Draco would be left
with just a few Galleons—
Then Draco mentally kicked himself. All he had to do was write
Father and explain that the money was gone because he had managed
to loan it to Harry Potter, and Father would send him a special congratulatory note written in golden ink, a giant Chocolate Frog that would
take two weeks to eat, and ten times as many Galleons just in case Harry
Potter needed another loan.
“It’s way too much, isn’t it,” said Harry. “I’m sorry, I shouldn’t have
asked—”
*

421

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

“Excuse me, I am a Malfoy, you know,” said Draco. “I was just surprised you wanted that much.”
“Don’t worry,” Harry Potter said cheerfully. “It’s nothing that
threatens your family’s interests, just me being evil.”
Draco nodded. “No problem, then. You want to go get it right
now?”
“Sure,” said Harry.
As they left the alcove and started heading toward the dungeons,
Draco couldn’t help but ask, “So can you tell me which plot this is for?”
“Rita Skeeter.”
Draco thought some very bad words to himself, but it was far too
late to say no.

**
*
By the time they’d reached the dungeons, Draco had started pulling together his thoughts again.
He was having trouble hating Harry Potter. Harry had been trying
to be friendly, he was just insane.
And that wasn’t going to stop Draco’s revenge or even slow it down.
“So,” Draco said, after looking around to make certain no one was
nearby. Their voices would both be Blurred, of course, but it never hurt
to be extra sure. “I’ve been thinking. When we bring new recruits into
the Conspiracy, they’re going to have to think we’re equals. Otherwise
it would only take one of them to blow the plot to Father. You already
worked that out, right?”
“Naturally,” said Harry.
“Will we be equals?” said Draco.
“I’m afraid not,” Harry said. It was clear that he was trying to sound
gentle, and also clear that he was trying to suppress a good deal of condescension and not quite succeeding. “I’m sorry, Draco, but you don’t
even know what the word Bayesian in Bayesian Conspiracy means right
now. You’re going to have to study for months before we take anyone
else in, just so you can put up a good front.”
*

422 *

**
*

MACHIAV ELLIAN INTELLIGENCE
H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

“Because I don’t know enough science,” Draco said, carefully keeping
his voice neutral.
Harry shook his head at that. “The problem isn’t that you’re ignorant of speciﬁc science things like deoxyribose nucleic acid. That
wouldn’t stop you from being my equal. The problem is that you aren’t
trained in the methods of rationality, the deeper secret knowledge behind
how all those discoveries got made in the ﬁrst place. I’ll try to teach you
those, but they’re a lot harder to learn. Think of what we did yesterday, Draco. Yes, you did some of the work. But I was the only one in
control. You answered some of the questions. I asked all of them. You
helped push. I did the steering by myself. And without the methods
of rationality, Draco, you can’t possibly steer the Conspiracy where it
needs to go.”
“I see,” said Draco, his voice sounding disappointed.
Harry’s voice tried to gentle itself even more. “I’ll try to respect your
expertise, Draco, about things like people stuﬀ. But you need to respect
my expertise too, and there’s just no way you could be my equal when
it comes to steering the Conspiracy. You’ve only been a scientist for one
day, you know one secret about deoxyribose nucleic acid, and you aren’t
trained in any of the methods of rationality.”
“I understand,” said Draco.
And he did.
People stuﬀ, Harry had said. Seizing control of the Conspiracy probably wouldn’t even be diﬃcult. And afterward, he would kill Harry
Potter just to be sure—
The memory rose up in Draco of how sick inside it had felt last night,
knowing Harry was screaming.
Draco thought some more bad words.
Fine. He wouldn’t kill Harry. Harry had been raised by Muggles, it
wasn’t his fault he was insane.
Instead, Harry would live on, just so that Draco could tell him that
it had all been for Harry’s own good, really, he ought to be grateful—
And with a sudden twitch of surprised pleasure, Draco realized that
it actually was for Harry’s own good. If Harry tried to carry out his
plan of playing Dumbledore and Father for fools, he would die.
*

423 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

That made it perfect.
Draco would take all of Harry’s dreams away from him, just as Harry
had done to him.
Draco would tell Harry that it had been for his own good, and it
would be absolutely true.
Draco would wield the Conspiracy and the power of science to purify the wizarding world, and Father would be as proud of him as if he’d
been a Death Eater.
Harry Potter’s evil plots would be foiled, and the forces of right
would prevail.
The perfect revenge.
Unless...
Just pretend to be pretending to be a scientist, Harry had told him.
Draco didn’t have words to describe exactly what was wrong with
Harry’s mind—
(since Draco had never heard the term depth of recursion)
—but he could guess what sort of plots it implied.
...unless all that was exactly what Harry wanted Draco to do as part
of some even larger plot which Draco would play right into by trying to
foil this one, Harry might even know that his plan was unworkable, it
might have no purpose except luring Draco to thwart it—
No. That way lay madness. There had to be a limit. The Dark Lord
himself hadn’t been that twisty. That sort of thing didn’t happen in real
life, only in Father’s silly bedtime stories about foolish gargoyles who
always ended up furthering the hero’s plans every time they tried to
stop him.

**
*
And beside Draco, Harry walked along with a smile on his face, thinking
about the evolutionary origins of human intelligence.
In the beginning, before people had quite understood how evolution
worked, they’d gone around thinking crazy ideas like human intelligence
evolved so that we could invent better tools.
*

424 *

**
*

MACHIAV ELLIAN INTELLIGENCE
H YPOTHESIS

*
*

*

The reason why this was crazy was that only one person in the tribe
had to invent a tool, and then everyone else would use it, and it would
spread to other tribes, and still be used by their descendants a hundred
years later. That was great from the perspective of scientiﬁc progress,
but in evolutionary terms, it meant that the person who invented something didn’t have much of a ﬁtness advantage, didn’t have all that many
more children than everyone else. Only relative ﬁtness advantages could
increase the relative frequency of a gene in the population, and drive
some lonely mutation to the point where it was universal and everyone
had it. And brilliant inventions just weren’t common enough to provide
the sort of consistent selection pressure it took to promote a mutation.
It was a natural guess, if you looked at humans with their guns and tanks
and nuclear weapons and compared them to chimpanzees, that the intelligence was there to make the technology. A natural guess, but wrong.
Before people had quite understood how evolution worked, they’d
gone around thinking crazy ideas like the climate changed, and tribes had
to migrate, and people had to become smarter in order to solve all the novel
problems.
But human beings had four times the brain size of a chimpanzee.
20% of a human’s metabolic energy went into feeding the brain. Humans were ridiculously smarter than any other species. That sort of thing
didn’t happen because the environment stepped up the diﬃculty of its
problems a little. Then the organisms would just get a little smarter to
solve them. Ending up with that gigantic outsized brain must have taken
some sort of runaway evolutionary process, something that would push
and push without limits.
And today’s scientists had a pretty good guess at what that runaway
evolutionary process had been.
Harry had once read a famous book called Chimpanzee Politics. The
book had described how an adult chimpanzee named Luit had confronted the aging alpha, Yeroen, with the help of a young, recently matured chimpanzee named Nikkie. Nikkie had not intervened directly in
the ﬁghts between Luit and Yeroen, but had prevented Yeroen’s other
supporters in the tribe from coming to his aid, distracting them whenever a confrontation developed between Luit and Yeroen. And in time
*

425 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

Luit had won, and become the new alpha, with Nikkie as the second
most powerful...
...though it hadn’t taken very long after that for Nikkie to form an
alliance with the defeated Yeroen, overthrow Luit, and become the new
new alpha.
It really made you appreciate what millions of years of hominids
trying to outwit each other—an evolutionary arms race without limit—
had led to in the way of increased mental capacity.
’Cause, y’know, a human would have totally seen that one coming.

**
*
And beside Harry, Draco walked along, suppressing his smile as he
thought about his revenge.
Someday, maybe in years but someday, Harry Potter would learn
just what it meant to underestimate a Malfoy.
Draco had awakened as a scientist in a single day. Harry had said that
wasn’t supposed to happen for months.
But of course if you were a Malfoy, you would be a more powerful
scientist than anyone who wasn’t.
So Draco would learn all of Harry Potter’s methods of rationality,
and then when the time was ripe—

*

426 *

CHAPTER

TWENT Y-FI V E

HOLD OFF ON PROPOSING
SOLUTIONS
Act 2:
he sun shone brilliantly into the Great Hall from the enchanted
sky-ceiling above, illuminating the students as though they sat beneath the naked sky, gleaming from their plates and bowls, as, refreshed
by a night’s sleep, they inhaled breakfast in preparation for whatever
plans they’d made for their Sunday.)
So. There was only one thing that made you a wizard.
That wasn’t surprising, when you thought about it. What dna
mostly did was tell ribosomes how to chain amino acids together into
proteins. Conventional physics seemed quite capable of describing
amino acids, and no matter how many amino acids you chained together,
conventional physics said you would never, ever get magic out of it.
And yet magic seemed to be hereditary, following dna.
Then that probably wasn’t because the dna was chaining together
nonmagical amino acids into magical proteins.
Rather the key dna sequence did not, of itself, give you your magic
at all.
Magic came from somewhere else.
(At the Ravenclaw table there was one boy who was staring oﬀ into
space, as his right hand automatically spooned some unimportant food
into his mouth from whatever was in front of him. You probably could
have substituted a pile of dirt and he wouldn’t have noticed.)

(T

*

427 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

And for some reason the Source of Magic was paying attention to
a particular dna marker among individuals who were ordinary apedescended humans in every other way.
(Actually there were quite a lot of boys and girls staring oﬀ into space.
It was the Ravenclaw table, after all.)
There were other lines of logic leading to the same conclusion.
Complex machinery was always universal within a sexually reproducing
species. If gene B relied on gene A, then A had to be useful on its own,
and rise to near-universality in the gene pool on its own, before B would
be useful often enough to confer a ﬁtness advantage. Then once B was
universal you would get a variant A* that relied on B, and then C that
relied on A* and B, then B* that relied on C, until the whole machine
would fall apart if you removed a single piece. But it all had to happen incrementally—evolution never looked ahead, evolution would never start
promoting B in preparation for A becoming universal later. Evolution
was the simple historical fact that, whichever organisms did in fact have
the most children, their genes would in fact be more frequent in the next
generation. So each piece of a complex machine had to become nearly
universal before other pieces in the machine would evolve to depend on
its presence.
So complex, interdependent machinery, the powerful sophisticated
protein machines that drove life, was always universal within a sexually
reproducing species—except for a small handful of non-interdependent
variants that were being selected on at any given time, as further complexity was slowly laid down. It was why all human beings had the same
underlying brain design, the same emotions, the same facial expressions
wired up to those emotions; those adaptations were complex, so they
had to be universal.
If magic had been like that, a big complex adaptation with lots of
necessary genes, then a wizard mating with a Muggle would have resulted
in a child with only half those parts and half the machine wouldn’t do
much. And so there would have been no Muggleborns, ever. Even if
all the pieces had individually gotten into the Muggle gene pool, they’d
never reassemble all in one place to form a wizard.
There hadn’t been some genetically isolated valley of humans that
*

428 *

**
*

HOLD OFF ON PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

*
*

*

had stumbled onto an evolutionary pathway leading to sophisticated
magical sections of the brain. That complex genetic machinery, if wizards interbred with Muggles, would never have reassembled into Muggleborns.
So however your genes made you a wizard, it wasn’t by containing
the blueprints for complicated machinery.
That was the other reason Harry had guessed the Mendelian pattern
would be there. If magical genes weren’t complicated, why would there
be more than one?
And yet magic itself seemed pretty complicated. A door-locking
spell would prevent the door from opening and prevent you from Transﬁguring the hinges and resist Finite Incantatem and Alohomora. Many
elements all pointing in the same direction: you could call that goalorientation, or in simpler language, purposefulness.
There were only two known causes of purposeful complexity. Natural selection, which produced things like butterﬂies. And intelligent
engineering, which produced things like cars.
Magic didn’t seem like something that had self-replicated into existence. Spells were purposefully complicated, but not, like a butterﬂy,
complicated for the purpose of making copies of themselves. Spells were
complicated for the purpose of serving their user, like a car.
Some intelligent engineer, then, had created the Source of Magic, and
told it to pay attention to a particular dna marker.
The obvious next thought was that this had something to do with
“Atlantis”.
Harry had asked Hermione about that earlier—on the train to Hogwarts, after hearing Draco say it—and so far as she knew, nothing more
was known than the word itself.
It might have been pure legend. But it was also plausible enough that
a civilization of magic-users, especially one from before the Interdict of
Merlin, would have managed to blow itself up.
The line of reasoning continued: Atlantis had been an isolated civilization that had somehow brought into being the Source of Magic, and
told it to serve only people with the Atlantean genetic marker, the blood
of Atlantis.
*

429 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

And by similar logic: The words a wizard spoke, the wand movements, those weren’t complicated enough of themselves to build up the
spell eﬀects from scratch—not the way that the three billion base pairs
of human dna actually were complicated enough to build a human body
from scratch, not the way that computer programs took up thousands
of bytes of data.
So the words and wand movements were just triggers, levers pulled
on some hidden and more complex machine. Buttons, not blueprints.
And just like a computer program wouldn’t compile if you made a
single spelling error, the Source of Magic wouldn’t respond to you unless
you cast your spells in exactly the right way.
The chain of logic was inexorable.
And it led inevitably toward a single ﬁnal conclusion.
The ancient forebears of the wizards, thousands of years earlier, had
told the Source of Magic to only levitate things if you said...
‘Wingardium Leviosa.’
Harry slumped over at the breakfast table, resting his forehead
wearily on his right hand.
There was a story from the dawn days of Artiﬁcial Intelligence—
back when they were just starting out and no one had yet realized the
problem would be diﬃcult—about a professor who had delegated one of
his grad students to solve the problem of computer vision.
Harry was beginning to understand how that grad student must have
felt.
This could take a while.
Why did it take more eﬀort to cast the Alohomora spell, if it was just
like pressing a button?
Who’d been silly enough to build in a spell for Avada Kedavra that
could only be cast using hatred?
Why did wordless Transﬁguration require you to make a complete
mental separation between the concept of form and concept of material?
Harry might not be done with this problem by the time he graduated
Hogwarts. He could still be working on this problem when he was thirty
years old. Hermione had been right, Harry hadn’t realized that on a gut
level before. He’d just given an inspiring speech about determination.
*

430 *

**
*

HOLD OFF ON PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

*
*

*

Harry’s mind brieﬂy considered whether to get on a gut level that he
might never solve the problem at all, then decided that would be taking
things much too far.
Besides, so long as he could get as far as immortality in the ﬁrst few
decades, he’d be ﬁne.
What method had the Dark Lord used? Come to think, the fact that
the Dark Lord had somehow managed to survive the death of his ﬁrst
body was almost inﬁnitely more important than the fact that he’d tried
to take over magical Britain—
“Excuse me,” said an expected voice from behind him in very unexpected tones. “At your convenience, Mr. Malfoy requests the favor of a
conversation.”
Harry did not choke on his breakfast cereal. Instead he turned
around and beheld Mr. Crabbe.
“Excuse me,” said Harry. “Don’t you mean ‘Da boss wants ta talk
wid youse?’”
Mr. Crabbe didn’t look happy. “Mr. Malfoy instructed me to speak
properly.”
“I can’t hear you,” Harry said. “You’re not speaking properly.” He
turned back to his bowl of tiny blue crystal snowﬂakes and deliberately
ate another spoonful.
“Da boss wants to talk with youse,” came a threatening voice from
behind him. “Ya’d better come see him if ya know what’s good for ya.”
There. Now everything was going according to plan.
Act 1:
“A reason?” said the old wizard. He restrained the fury from his face.
The boy before him had been the victim, and certainly did not need to
be frightened any further. “There is nothing that can excuse—”
“What I did to him was worse.”
The old wizard stiﬀened in sudden horror. “Harry, what have you
done?”
“I tricked Draco into believing that I’d tricked him into participating
in a ritual that sacriﬁced his belief in blood purism. And that meant
*

431

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

he couldn’t be a Death Eater when he grew up. He’d lost everything,
Headmaster.”
There was a long quiet in the oﬃce, broken only by the tiny puﬀs
and whistles of the ﬁddly things, which after enough time had come to
seem like silence.
“Dear me,” said the old wizard, “I do feel silly. And here I was expecting you might try to redeem the heir of Malfoy by, say, showing him
true friendship and kindness.”
“Ha! Yeah, like that would have worked.”
The old wizard sighed. This was taking it too far. “Tell me, Harry.
Did it even occur to you that there was something incongruous about
setting out to redeem someone through lies and trickery?”
“I did it without telling any direct lies, and since we’re talking about
Draco Malfoy here, I think the word you’re looking for is congruous.”
The boy looked rather smug.
The old wizard shook his head in despair. “And this is the hero.
We’re all doomed.”

**
*
Act 5:
The long, narrow tunnel of rough stone, unlit except by a child’s
wand, seemed to stretch on for miles.
The reason for this was simple: It did stretch on for miles.
The time was three in the morning, and Fred and George were starting the long way down the secret passage that led from a statue of a oneeyed witch in Hogwarts, to the cellar of the Honeydukes candyshop in
Hogsmeade.
“How’s it doing?” said Fred in a low voice.
(Not that there’d be anyone listening, but there was something odd
about talking in a normal voice when you were going through a secret
passage.)
“Still on the fritz,” said George.
“Both, or—”
*

432 *

**
*

HOLD OFF ON PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

*
*

*

“Intermittent one ﬁxed itself again. Other one’s same as ever.”
The Map was an extraordinarily powerful artifact, capable of tracking every sentient being on the school grounds, in real time, by name.
Almost certainly, it had been created during the original raising of Hogwarts. It was not good that errors were starting to pop up. Chances were
that no one except Dumbledore could ﬁx it if it was broken.
And the Weasley twins weren’t about to turn the Map over to Dumbledore. It would have been an unforgivable insult to the Marauders—
the four unknowns who’d managed to steal part of the Hogwarts security system, something probably forged by Salazar Slytherin himself, and
twist it into a tool for student pranking.
Some might have considered it disrespectful.
Some might have considered it criminal.
The Weasley twins ﬁrmly believed that if Godric Gryﬃndor had
been around to see it, he would have approved.
The brothers walked on and on and on, mostly in silence. The
Weasley twins talked to each other when they were thinking through
new pranks, or when one of them knew something the other didn’t.
Otherwise there wasn’t much point. If they already knew the same information, they tended to think the same thoughts and make the same
decisions.
(Back in the old days, whenever magical identical twins were born,
it had been the custom to kill one of them after birth.)
In time, Fred and George clambered out into a dusty cellar, strewn
with barrels and racks of strange ingredients.
Fred and George waited. It wouldn’t have been polite to do anything
else.
Before too long a thin old man in black pajamas clambered down the
steps that led into the cellar, yawning. “Hello, boys,” said Ambrosius
Flume. “I wasn’t expecting you tonight. Out of stock already?”
Fred and George decided that Fred would speak.
“Not exactly, Mr. Flume,” said Fred. “We were hoping you could
help us with something considerably more... interesting.”
“Now, boys,” said Flume, sounding severe, “I hope you didn’t wake
me up just so I could tell you again that I’m not selling you any mer*

433 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

chandise that could get you into real trouble. Not until you’re sixteen,
anyways—”
George drew forth an item from his robes, and wordlessly passed it
to Flume. “Have you seen this?” said Fred.
Flume looked at yesterday’s edition of the Daily Prophet and nodded,
scowling. The headline on the paper read The next Dark Lord? and
showed a young boy which some student’s camera had managed to catch
in an uncharacteristically cold and grim expression.
“I can’t believe that Malfoy,” Flume snapped. “Going after the boy
when he’s only eleven! The man ought to be ground up and used to
make chocolates!”
Fred and George blinked in unison. Malfoy was behind Rita Skeeter?
Harry Potter hadn’t warned them about that... which surely meant that
Harry didn’t know. He never would have brought them in if he did...
Fred and George exchanged glances. Well, Harry didn’t need to
know until after the job was done.
“Mr. Flume,” Fred said quietly, “the Boy-Who-Lived needs your
help.”
Flume looked at them both.
Then he let out his breath with a sigh.
“All right,” said Flume, “what do you want?”
Act 6:
When Rita Skeeter was intent on a tasty prey, she didn’t tend to notice the scurrying ants who constituted the rest of the universe, which
was how she almost bumped into the balding young man who’d stepped
into her pathway.
“Miss Skeeter,” said the man, sounding rather severe and cold for
someone whose face looked that young. “Fancy running into you here.”
“Out of my way, buster!” snapped Rita, and tried to step around him.
The man in her pathway matched the movement so perfectly that it
was like neither of them had moved at all, just stood still while the street
shifted around them.
Rita’s eyes narrowed. “Who do you think you are?”
*

434 *

**
*

HOLD OFF ON PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

*
*

*

“How very foolish,” the man said dryly. “It would have been wise
to memorize the face of the disguised Death Eater training Harry Potter
to be the next Dark Lord. After all,” a thin smile, “that certainly sounds
like someone you wouldn’t want to run into on the street, especially
after doing a hatchet job on him in the newspaper.”
Rita took a moment to place the reference. This was Quirinus Quirrell? He looked too young and too old at the same time; his face, if it
relaxed from its severe and condescending pose, would belong to someone in his late thirties. And his hair was already falling out? Couldn’t
he aﬀord a healer?
No, that wasn’t important, she had a time and a place and a beetle to
be. She’d just received an anonymous tip about Madam Bones making
time with one of her younger assistants. That would be worth quite a
bonus if she could manage to verify it, Bones was high on the hit list.
The tipster had said that Bones and her young assistant were due to eat
lunch in a special room at Mary’s Place, a very popular room for certain
purposes; a room which, she’d found, was secure against all listening
devices, but not proof against a beautiful blue beetle nestled up against
one wall...
“Out of my way!” Rita said, and tried to push Quirrell from her
path. Quirrell’s arm brushed her own, deﬂecting, and Rita staggered as
the thrust went into the thin air.
Quirrell pulled up the sleeve of his left robe, showing his left arm.
“Observe,” said Quirrell, “no Dark Mark. I would like your paper to
publish a retraction.”
Rita let out an incredulous laugh. Of course the man wasn’t a real
Death Eater. The paper wouldn’t have published it if he was. “Forget it,
buster. Now take a hike.”
Quirrell stared at her for a moment.
Then he smiled.
“Miss Skeeter,” said Quirrell, “I had hoped to ﬁnd some lever that
would prove persuasive. Yet I ﬁnd that I cannot deny myself the pleasure
of simply crushing you.”
“It’s been tried. Now get out of my way, buster, or I’ll ﬁnd some
Aurors and have you arrested for obstruction of journalism.”
*

435 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

Quirrell swept her a small bow, and then walked past. “Goodbye,
Rita Skeeter,” said his voice from behind her.
As Rita bulled on ahead, she noted in the back of her mind that the
man was whistling a tune as he walked away.
Like that would scare her.

**
*
Act 4:
“Sorry, count me out,” said Lee Jordan. “I’m more the giant spider
type.”
The Boy-Who-Lived had said that he had important work for the Order of Chaos, something serious and secret, more signiﬁcant and diﬃcult
than their usual run of pranks.
And then Harry Potter had launched into a speech that was inspiring, yet vague. A speech to the eﬀect that Fred and George and Lee had
tremendous potential if they could just learn to be weirder. To make
people’s lives surreal, instead of just surprising them with the equivalents of buckets of water propped above doors. (Fred and George had
exchanged interested looks, they’d never thought of that one.) Harry
Potter had invoked a picture of the prank they’d pulled on Neville—
which, Harry had mentioned with some remorse, the Sorting Hat had
chewed him out on—but which must have made Neville doubt his own
sanity. For Neville it would have felt like being suddenly transported
into an alternate universe. The same way everyone else had felt when
they’d seen Snape apologize. That was the true power of pranking.
Are you with me? Harry Potter had cried, and Lee Jordan had answered no.
“Count us in,” said Fred, or possibly George, for there was no doubt
that Godric Gryﬃndor would have said yes.
Lee Jordan gave a regretful grin, and stood up, and left the deserted
and Quieted corridor where the four members of the Order of Chaos
had met and sat down in a conspiratorial circle.
*

436 *

**
*

HOLD OFF ON PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

*
*

*

The three members of the Order of Chaos got down to business.
(It wasn’t that sad. Fred and George would still work with Lee on
giant spider pranks, same as ever. They’d only started calling it the Order
of Chaos in order to recruit Harry Potter, after Ron had told them about
Harry being weird and evil, and Fred and George had decided to save
Harry by showing him true friendship and kindness. Thankfully this no
longer seemed necessary—although they weren’t quite sure about that...)
“So,” said one of the twins, “what’s this about?”
“Rita Skeeter,” said Harry. “Do you know who she is?”
Fred and George nodded, frowning.
“She’s been asking questions about me.”
That wasn’t good news.
“Can you guess what I want you to do?”
Fred and George looked at each other, a bit puzzled. “You want us
to slip her some of our more interesting candies?”
“No,” said Harry. “No, no, no! That’s giant-spider thinking! Come
on, what would you do if you heard that Rita Skeeter was looking for
rumors about you?”
That made it obvious.
Grins slowly started on the faces of Fred and George.
“Start rumors about ourselves,” they replied.
“Exactly,” said Harry, grinning widely. “But these can’t be just any
rumors. I want to teach people never to believe what the newspaper says
about Harry Potter, any more than Muggles believe what the newspaper
says about Elvis. At ﬁrst I just thought about ﬂooding Rita Skeeter with
so many rumors that she wouldn’t know what to believe, but then she’ll
just cherry-pick the ones that sound plausible and bad. So what I want
you to do is create a fake story about me, and get Rita Skeeter to believe
it somehow. But it has to be something that, afterward, everyone will
know was fake. We want to fool Rita Skeeter and her editors, and afterward have the proof come out that it was false. And of course—given
that those are the requirements—the story has to be as ridiculous as it can
possibly be, and still get printed. Do you understand what I want you
to do?”
“Not exactly...” Fred or George said slowly. “You want us to invent
*

437 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

the story?”
“I want you to do all of it,” Harry Potter said. “I’m sort of busy right
now, plus I want to be able to say truthfully that I had no idea what was
coming. Surprise me.”
For a moment there was a very evil grin on the faces of Fred and
George.
Then they turned serious. “But Harry, we don’t really know how to
do anything like that—”
“So ﬁgure it out,” Harry said. “I have conﬁdence in you. Not total
conﬁdence, but if you can’t do it, tell me that, and I’ll try someone else,
or do it myself. If you have a really good idea—for both the ridiculous
story, and how to convince Rita Skeeter and her editors to print it—then
you can go ahead and do it. But don’t go with something mediocre. If
you can’t come up with something awesome, just say so.”
Fred and George exchanged worried glances.
“I can’t think of anything,” said George.
“Neither can I,” said Fred. “Sorry.”
Harry stared at them.
And then Harry began to explain how you went about thinking of
things.
It had been known to take longer than two seconds, said Harry.
You never called any question impossible, said Harry, until you had
taken an actual clock and thought about it for ﬁve minutes, by the motion of the minute hand. Not ﬁve minutes metaphorically, ﬁve minutes
by a physical clock.
And furthermore, Harry said, his voice emphatic and his right hand
thumping hard on the ﬂoor, you did not start out immediately looking
for solutions.
Harry then launched into an explanation of a test done by someone
named Norman Maier, who was something called an organizational psychologist, and who’d asked two diﬀerent sets of problem-solving groups
to tackle a problem.
The problem, Harry said, had involved three employees doing three
jobs. The junior employee wanted to just do the easiest job. The senior employee wanted to rotate between jobs, to avoid boredom. An
*

438 *

**
*

HOLD OFF ON PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

*
*

*

eﬃciency expert had recommended giving the junior person the easiest
job and the senior person the hardest job, which would be 20% more
productive.
One set of problem-solving groups had been given the instruction
“Do not propose solutions until the problem has been discussed as thoroughly as possible without suggesting any.”
The other set of problem-solving groups had been given no instructions. And those people had done the natural thing, and reacted to the
presence of a problem by proposing solutions. And people had gotten
attached to those solutions, and started ﬁghting about them, and arguing
about the relative importance of freedom versus eﬃciency and so on.
The ﬁrst set of problem-solving groups, the ones given instructions
to discuss the problem ﬁrst and then solve it, had been far more likely to
hit upon the solution of letting the junior employee keep the easiest job
and rotating the other two people between the other two jobs, for what
the expert’s data said would be a 19% improvement.
Starting out by looking for solutions was taking things entirely out
of order. Like starting a meal with dessert, only bad.
(Harry also quoted someone named Robyn Dawes as saying that the
harder a problem was, the more likely people were to try to solve it
immediately.)
So Harry was going to leave this problem to Fred and George, and
they would discuss all the aspects of it and brainstorm anything they
thought might be remotely relevant. And they shouldn’t try to come
up with an actual solution until they’d ﬁnished doing that, unless of
course they did happen to randomly think of something awesome, in
which case they could write it down for afterward and then go back to
thinking. And he didn’t want to hear back from them about any socalled failures to think of anything for at least a week. Some people spent
decades trying to think of things.
“Any questions?” said Harry.
Fred and George stared at each other.
“I can’t think of any.”
“Neither can I.”
Harry coughed gently. “You didn’t ask about your budget.”
*

439 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

Budget? they thought.
“I could just tell you the amount,” Harry said. “But I think this will
be more inspiring.”
Harry’s hands dipped into his robe, and brought forth—
Fred and George almost fell over, even though they were sitting
down.
“Don’t spend it for the sake of spending it,” Harry said. On the
stone ﬂoor in front of them gleamed an absolutely ridiculous amount of
money. “Only spend it if awesomeness requires; and what awesomeness
does require, don’t hesitate to spend. If there’s anything left over, just
return it afterward, I trust you. Oh, and you get ten percent of what’s
there, regardless of how much you end up spending—”
“We can’t!” blurted one of the twins. “We don’t accept money for
that sort of thing!”
(The twins never took money for doing anything illegal. Unknown
to Ambrosius Flume, they were selling all of his merchandise at zero
percent markup. Fred and George wanted to be able to testify—under
Veritaserum if necessary—that they had not been proﬁteering criminals,
just providing a public service.)
Harry frowned at them. “But I’m asking you to put in some real
work here. A grownup would get paid for doing something like this,
and it would still count as a favor for a friend. You can’t just hire people
for this sort of thing.”
Fred and George shook their heads.
“Fine,” Harry said. “I’ll just get you expensive Christmas presents,
and if you try returning them to me I’ll burn them. Now you don’t even
know how much I’m going to spend on you, except, obviously, that it’s
going to be more than if you’d just taken the money. And I’m going to
buy you those presents anyway, so think about that before you tell me
you can’t think of anything awesome.”
Harry stood up, smiling, and turned to go while Fred and George
were still gaping in shock. He strode a few steps away, and then turned
back.
“Oh, one last thing,” Harry said. “Leave Professor Quirrell out of
whatever you do. He doesn’t like publicity. I know it’d be easier to get
*

440 *

**
*

HOLD OFF ON PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

*
*

*

people to believe weird things about the Defense Professor than anyone
else, and I’m sorry to have to get in your way like that, but please, leave
Professor Quirrell out of it.”
And Harry turned again and took a few more steps—
Looked back one last time, and said, softly, “Thank you.”
And left.
There was a long pause after he’d departed.
“So,” said one.
“So,” said the other.
“The Defense Professor doesn’t like publicity, does he.”
“Harry doesn’t know us very well, does he.”
“No, he doesn’t.”
“But we won’t use his money for that, of course.”
“Of course not, that wouldn’t be right. We’ll do the Defense Professor separately.”
“We’ll get some Gryﬃndors to write Skeeter, and say...”
“...his sleeve lifted up one time in Defense class, and they saw the
Dark Mark...”
“...and he’s probably teaching Harry Potter all sorts of dreadful
things...”
“...and he’s the worst Defense Professor anyone remembers even in
Hogwarts, he’s not just failing to teach us, he’s getting everything wrong,
the complete opposite of what it should be...”
“...like when he claimed that you could only cast the Killing Curse
using love, which made it pretty much useless.”
“I like that one.”
“Thanks.”
“I bet the Defense Professor likes it too.”
“He does have a sense of humor. He wouldn’t have called us what he
did if he didn’t have a sense of humor.”
“But are we really going to be able to do Harry’s job?”
“Harry said to discuss the problem before trying to solve it, so let’s
do that.”
The Weasley twins decided that George would be the enthusiastic
one while Fred doubted.
*

441

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

“It all seems sort of contradictory,” said Fred. “He wants it to be
ridiculous enough that everyone laughs at Skeeter and knows it’s wrong,
and he wants Skeeter to believe it. We can’t do both things at the same
time.”
“We’ll have to fake up some evidence to convince Skeeter,” said
George.
“Was that a solution?” said Fred.
They considered this.
“Maybe,” said George, “but I don’t think we should be all that strict
about it, do you?”
The twins shrugged helplessly.
“So then the fake evidence has to be good enough to convince
Skeeter,” said Fred. “Can we really do that on our own?”
“We don’t have to do it on our own,” said George, and pointed to
the pile of money. “We can hire other people to help us.”
The twins got a thoughtful look on their face.
“That could use up Harry’s budget pretty fast,” said Fred. “This is a
lot of money for us, but it’s not a lot of money for someone like Flume.”
“Maybe people will give discounts if they know it’s for Harry,” said
George. “But most importantly of all, whatever we do, it has to be
impossible.”
Fred blinked. “What do you mean, impossible?”
“So impossible that we don’t get in trouble, because no one believes
we could have done it. So impossible that even Harry starts wondering.
It has to be surreal, it has to make people doubt their own sanity, it has
to be... better than Harry.”
Fred’s eyes were wide in astonishment. This happened sometimes,
between them, but not often. “But why?”
“They were pranks. They were all pranks. The pie was a prank. The
Remembrall was a prank. Kevin Entwhistle’s cat was a prank. Snape was
a prank. We’re the best pranksters in Hogwarts, are we going to roll over
and give up without a ﬁght?”
“He’s the Boy-Who-Lived,” said Fred.
“And we’re the Weasley twins! He’s challenging us. He said we could
do what he does. But I bet he doesn’t think we’ll ever be as good as him.”
*

442 *

**
*

HOLD OFF ON PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

*
*

*

“He’s right,” said Fred, feeling rather nervous. The Weasley twins
did sometimes disagree even when they had all the same information,
but every time they did it seemed unnatural, like at least one of them
must be doing something wrong. “This is Harry Potter we’re talking
about. He can do the impossible. We can’t.”
“Yes we can,” said George. “And we have to be more impossible than
him.”
“But—” said Fred.
“It’s what Godric Gryﬃndor would do,” said George.
That settled it, and the twins snapped back into... whatever it was
that was normal for them.
“All right, then—”
“—let’s think about it.”

*

443 *

CHAPTER

TWENT Y-SIX

NOTICING CONFUSION
rofessor Quirrell’s oﬃce hours consisted of 11:40 to 11:55am on
Thursday. That was for all of his students in all years. It cost a
Quirrell point just to knock on the door, and if he didn’t think your
reason was worth his time, you would lose another ﬁfty.
Harry knocked on the door.
There was a pause. Then a biting voice said, “I suppose you may as
well come in, Mr. Potter.”
And before Harry could touch the doorknob, the door slammed
open, hitting the wall with a sharp crack that sounded like something
might have broken in the wood, or the stone, or both.
Professor Quirrell was leaning back in his chair and reading a suspiciously old-looking book, bound in night-blue leather with silver runes
on the spine. His eyes had not moved from the pages. “I am not in a
good mood, Mr. Potter. And when I am not a good mood, I am not a
pleasant person to be around. For your own sake, conduct your business
quickly and depart.”
A cold chill seeped from the room, as though it contained something
that cast darkness the way lamps cast light, and which hadn’t been fully
shaded.
Harry was a bit taken aback. Not in a good mood didn’t quite seem
to cover it. What could be bothering Professor Quirrell this much...?
Well, you didn’t just walk out on friends when they were feeling
down. Harry cautiously advanced into the room. “Is there anything I
can do to help—”
“No,” said Professor Quirrell, still not looking up from the book.

P

*

445 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

“I mean, if you’ve been dealing with idiots and want someone sane
to talk to...”
There was a surprisingly long pause.
Professor Quirrell slammed the book shut and it vanished with a
small whispering sound. He looked up, then, and Harry ﬂinched.
“I suppose an intelligent conversation would be pleasant for me at this
point,” said Professor Quirrell in the same biting tone that had invited
Harry to enter. “You are not likely to ﬁnd it so, be warned.”
Harry drew a deep breath. “I promise I won’t mind if you snap at
me. What happened?”
The cold in the room seemed to deepen. “A sixth-year Gryﬃndor cast a curse at one of my more promising students, a sixth-year
Slytherin.”
Harry swallowed. “What... sort of curse?”
And the fury on Professor Quirrell’s face was no longer contained.
“Why bother to ask an unimportant question like that, Mr. Potter? Our
friend the sixth-year Gryﬃndor did not think it was important!”
“Are you serious?” Harry said before he could stop himself.
“No, I’m in a terrible mood today for no particular reason. Yes I’m
serious, you fool! He didn’t know. He actually didn’t know. I didn’t
believe it until the Aurors conﬁrmed it under Veritaserum. He is in
his sixth year at Hogwarts and he cast a high-level Dark curse without
knowing what it did.”
“You don’t mean,” Harry said, “that he was mistaken about what it
did, that he somehow read the wrong spell description—”
“All he knew was that it was meant to be directed at an enemy. He
knew that was all he knew.”
And that had been enough to cast the spell. “I do not understand
how anything with that small a brain could walk upright.”
“Indeed, Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell.
There was a pause. Professor Quirrell leaned forward and picked up
the silver inkwell from his desk, turning it around in his hands, staring
at it as though wondering how he could go about torturing an inkwell
to death.
“Was the sixth-year Slytherin seriously hurt?” said Harry.
*

446 *

**
*

NOTICING CONFUSION

*
*

*

“Yes.”
“Was the sixth-year Gryﬃndor raised by Muggles?”
“Yes.”
“Is Dumbledore refusing to expel him because the poor boy didn’t
know?”
Professor Quirrell’s hands whitened on the inkwell. “Do you have a
point, Mr. Potter, or are you just stating the obvious?”
“Professor Quirrell,” said Harry gravely, “all the Muggle-raised students in Hogwarts need a safety lecture in which they are told the things
so ridiculously obvious that no wizardborn would ever think to mention them. Don’t cast curses if you don’t know what they do, if you
discover something dangerous don’t tell the world about it, don’t brew
high-level potions without supervision in a bathroom, the reason why
there are underage magic laws, all the basics.”
“Why?” said Professor Quirrell. “Let the stupid ones die before they
breed.”
“If you don’t mind losing a few sixth-year Slytherins along with
them.”
The inkwell caught ﬁre in Professor Quirrell’s hands and burned
with a terrible slowness, hideous black-orange ﬂames tearing at the metal
and seeming to take tiny bites from it, the silver twisting as it melted, as
though it were trying and failing to escape. There was a tinny shrieking
sound, as though the metal were screaming.
“I suppose you are right,” Professor Quirrell said with a resigned
smile. “I shall design a lecture to ensure that Muggleborns who are too
stupid to live do not take anyone valuable with them as they depart.”
The inkwell went on screaming and burning in Professor Quirrell’s
hands, tiny droplets of metal, still on ﬁre, now dripping to the desk, as
though the inkwell were crying.
“You’re not running away,” observed Professor Quirrell.
Harry opened his mouth—
“If you’re about to say you’re not scared of me,” said Professor Quirrell, “don’t.”
“You are the scariest person I know,” Harry said, “and one of the
top reasons for that is your control. I simply can’t imagine hearing that
*

447 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

you’d hurt someone you had not made a deliberate decision to hurt.”
The ﬁre in Professor Quirrell’s hands winked out, and he carefully
placed the ruined inkwell on his desk. “You say the nicest things,
Mr. Potter. Have you been taking lessons in ﬂattery? From, perhaps,
Mr. Malfoy?”
Harry kept his expression blank, and realized one second too late
that it might as well have been a signed confession. Professor Quirrell
didn’t care what your expression looked like, he cared which states of
mind made it likely.
“I see,” said Professor Quirrell. “Mr. Malfoy is a useful friend to have,
Mr. Potter, and there is much he can teach you, but I hope you have not
made the mistake of trusting him with too many conﬁdences.”
“He knows nothing which I fear becoming known,” said Harry.
“Well done,” said Professor Quirrell, smiling slightly. “So what was
your original business here?”
“I think I’m done with the preliminary exercises in Occlumency and
ready for the tutor.”
Professor Quirrell nodded. “I shall conduct you to Gringotts this
Sunday.” He paused, looking at Harry, and smiled. “And we might even
make it a little outing, if you like. I’ve just had a pleasant thought.”
Harry nodded, smiling back.
As Harry left the oﬃce, he heard Professor Quirrell humming a
small tune.
Harry was glad he’d been been able to cheer him up.

**
*
That Sunday there seemed to be a rather large number of people whispering in the hallways, at least when Harry Potter walked past them.
And a lot of pointed ﬁngers.
And a great deal of female giggling.
It had started at breakfast, when someone had asked Harry if he’d
heard the news, and Harry had quickly interrupted and said that if the
*

448 *

**
*

NOTICING CONFUSION

*
*

*

news was written by Rita Skeeter then he didn’t want to hear about it,
he wanted to read it in the paper himself.
It had then developed that not many students at Hogwarts got copies
of the Daily Prophet, and that the copies which had not already been
bought up from their owners were being passed around in some sort
of complicated order and nobody really knew who had one at the moment...
So Harry had used a Quieting Charm and gone on to eat his breakfast, trusting to his seat-mates to wave oﬀ the many, many questioners,
and doing his best to ignore the incredulity, the laughter, the congratulatory smiles, the pitying looks, the fearful glances, and the dropped
plates as new people came down for breakfast and heard.
Harry was feeling rather curious, but it really wouldn’t have done to
spoil the artistry by hearing it secondhand.
He’d done homework in the safety of his trunk for the next couple
of hours, after telling his dormmates to come get him if anyone found
him an original newspaper.
Harry was still ignorant at 10am, when he’d left Hogwarts in a carriage with Professor Quirrell, who was in the front right, and currently
slumped over in zombie-mode. Harry was sitting diagonally across, as
far away as the carriage allowed, in the back left. Even so, Harry had a
constant feeling of doom as the carriage rattled over a small path through
a section of non-forbidden forest. It made it a bit hard to read, especially
since the material was diﬃcult, and Harry suddenly wished he was reading one of his childhood science ﬁction books instead—
“We’re outside the wards, Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell’s voice
from the front. “Time to go.”
Professor Quirrell carefully disembarked from the carriage, bracing
himself as he stepped down. Harry, on his own side, jumped oﬀ.
Harry was wondering exactly how they’d get there when Professor Quirrell said “Catch!” and threw a bronze Knut at him, and Harry
caught it without thinking.
A giant intangible hook caught at Harry’s abdomen and yanked him
back, hard, only without any sense of acceleration, and an instant later
Harry was standing in the middle of Diagon Alley.
*

449 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

(Excuse me, what? said his brain.)
(We just teleported, explained Harry.)
(That didn’t used to happen in the ancestral environment, Harry’s brain
complained, and disoriented him.)
Harry staggered as his feet adjusted to the brick of the street instead
of the dirt of the forest corridor they had been traversing. He straightened, still dizzy, with the bustling witches and wizards seeming to sway
slightly, and the cries of the shopkeepers seeming to move around in his
hearing, as his brain tried to place a world to be located in.
Moments later, there was a sort of sucking-popping sound from a few
paces behind Harry, and when Harry turned to look Professor Quirrell
was there.
“Do you mind—” said Harry, at the same time as Professor Quirrell
said, “I’m afraid I—”
Harry stopped, Professor Quirrell didn’t.
“—need to go oﬀ and set something in motion, Mr. Potter. As it
has been thoroughly explained to me that I am responsible for anything
whatsoever that happens to you, I’ll be leaving you with—”
“Newsstand,” Harry said.
“Pardon?”
“Or anywhere I can buy a copy of the Daily Prophet. Put me there
and I’ll be happy.”
Shortly after, Harry had been delivered into a bookstore, accompanied by several quietly spoken, ambiguous threats. And the shopkeeper
had gotten less ambiguous threats, judging by the way he had cringed,
and how his eyes now kept darting between Harry and the entrance.
If the bookstore burned down, Harry was going to stick around in
the middle of the ﬁre until Professor Quirrell got back.
Meanwhile—
Harry took a quick glance around.
The bookstore seemed rather small and shoddy, with only four rows
of bookcases visible, and the nearest shelf Harry’s eyes had jumped to
seemed to deal with narrow, cheaply bound books with grim titles like
The Massacre of Albania in the Fifteenth Century.
First things ﬁrst. Harry stepped over to the seller’s counter.
*

450 *

**
*

NOTICING CONFUSION

*
*

*

“Pardon me,” said Harry, “One copy of the Daily Prophet, please.”
“Five Sickles,” said the shopkeeper. “Sorry, kid, I’ve only got three
left.”
Five Sickles dropped onto the counter. Harry had the feeling he
could have bargained him down a couple of points, but at this point
he didn’t really care.
The shopkeeper’s eyes widened and he seemed to really notice Harry
for the ﬁrst time. “You!”
“Me!”
“Is it true? Are you really—”
“Shut up! Sorry, I’ve been waiting all day to read this in the original
newspaper instead of hearing about it secondhand, so please just hand it
over, all right?”
The shopkeeper stared at Harry for a moment, then wordlessly
reached under the counter and passed over one folded copy of the Daily
Prophet.
The headline read:
Harry Potter
secretly betrothed
to Ginevra Weasley
Harry stared.
He lifted the newspaper oﬀ the counter, softly, reverently, like he
was handling an original Escher painting, and unbent it to read...
...about the evidence that had convinced Rita Skeeter.
...and some interesting further details.
...and yet more evidence.
Fred and George had cleared it with their sister ﬁrst, surely? Yes,
of course they had. There was a picture of Ginevra Weasley sighing
longingly over what Harry could see, looking closely, was a photo of
himself. That had to have been staged.
But how on Earth...?
Harry was sitting in a cheap folding chair, rereading the newspaper
for the fourth time, when the door whispered softly and Professor Quirrell came back into the shop.
*

451

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

“My apologies for—what in Merlin’s name are you reading?”
“It would seem,” said Harry, awe in his voice, “that one Mr. Arthur
Weasley was placed under the Imperius Curse by a Death Eater whom
my father killed, thus creating a debt to the Noble House of Potter,
which my father demanded be repaid by the hand in marriage of the recently born Ginevra Weasley. Do people actually do that sort of thing
around here?”
“How could Miss Skeeter possibly be fool enough to believe—”
And Professor Quirrell’s voice cut oﬀ.
Harry had been reading the newspaper held vertically and unfolded,
which meant that Professor Quirrell, from where he was standing, could
see the text underneath the headline.
The look of shock on Professor Quirrell’s face was a work of art
almost on par with the newspaper itself.
“Don’t worry,” said Harry cheerfully, “it’s all fake.”
From elsewhere in the store, he heard the shopkeeper gasp. There
was the sound of a stack of books falling over.
“Mr. Potter...” Professor Quirrell said slowly, “are you sure of that?”
“Quite sure. Shall we go?”
Professor Quirrell nodded, looking rather abstracted, and Harry
folded the newspaper back up, and followed him out of the door.
For some reason Harry didn’t seem to be hearing any street noises
now.
They walked in silence for thirty seconds before Professor Quirrell
spoke. “Miss Skeeter viewed the original proceedings of the restricted
Wizengamot session.”
“Yes.”
“The original proceedings of the Wizengamot.”
“Yes.”
“I would have trouble doing that.”
“Really?” said Harry. “Because if my suspicions are correct, this was
done by a Hogwarts student.”
“That is beyond impossible,” Professor Quirrell said ﬂatly. “Mr. Potter... I regret to say that this young lady expects to marry you.”
“But that is improbable,” said Harry. “To quote Douglas Adams, the
*

452 *

**
*

NOTICING CONFUSION

*
*

*

impossible often has a kind of integrity which the merely improbable
lacks.”
“I see your point,” Professor Quirrell said slowly. “But... no, Mr. Potter. It may be impossible, but I can imagine tampering with the Wizengamot proceedings. It is unimaginable that the Grand Manager of
Gringotts should aﬃx the seal of his oﬃce in witness to a false betrothal
contract, and Miss Skeeter personally veriﬁed that seal.”
“Indeed,” said Harry, “you would expect the Grand Manager of
Gringotts to get involved with that much money changing hands. It
seems Mr. Weasley was greatly in debt, and so demanded an additional
payment of ten thousand Galleons—”
“Ten thousand Galleons for a Weasley? You could buy the daughter
of a Noble House for that!”
“Excuse me,” Harry said. “I really have to ask at this point, do people
actually do that sort of thing around here—”
“Rarely,” said Professor Quirrell, with a frown on his face. “And not
at all, I suspect, since the Dark Lord departed. I suppose that according
to the newspaper, your father just paid it?”
“He didn’t have any choice,” said Harry. “Not if he wanted to fulﬁll
the conditions of the prophecy.”
“Give me that,” said Professor Quirrell, and the newspaper leaped
out of Harry’s hand so fast that he got a paper cut.
Harry automatically put the ﬁnger in his mouth to suck on, feeling
rather shocked, and turned to remonstrate with Professor Quirrell—
Professor Quirrell had stopped short in the middle of the street, and
his eyes were ﬂickering rapidly back and forth as an invisible force held
the newspaper suspended before him.
Harry watched, gaping in open awe, as the newspaper opened to
reveal pages two and three. And not much long after, four and ﬁve. It
was like the man had cast oﬀ a pretense of mortality.
And after a troublingly short time, the paper neatly folded itself up
again. Professor Quirrell plucked it from the air and tossed it to Harry,
who caught it in sheer reﬂex; and then Professor Quirrell started walking
again, and Harry automatically trudged after.
“No,” said Professor Quirrell, “that prophecy didn’t sound quite
*

453 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

right to me either.”
Harry nodded, still stunned.
“The centaurs could have been put under an Imperius,” Professor
Quirrell said, frowning, “that seems understandable. A goblin would
be immune to that and all other mental inﬂuence, but what magic can
make, magic can corrupt, and it is not unthinkable that the Great Seal of
Gringotts could be twisted to another’s hand. The Unspeakable could
have been impersonated with Polyjuice, likewise the Bavarian seer. And
with enough eﬀort it might be possible to tamper with the proceedings
of the Wizengamot. Do you have any idea how that was done?”
“I do not have one single plausible hypothesis,” said Harry. “I do
know it was done on a total budget of forty Galleons.”
Professor Quirrell stopped short and whirled on Harry. His expression was now completely incredulous. “Forty Galleons will pay a competent ward-breaker to open a path into a home you wish to burglarize!
Forty thousand Galleons might pay a team of the greatest professional
criminals in the world to tamper with the proceedings of the Wizengamot!”
Harry shrugged helplessly. “I’ll remember that the next time I want
to save thirty-nine thousand, nine hundred and sixty Galleons by ﬁnding
the right contractor.”
“I do not say this often,” said Professor Quirrell. “I am impressed.”
“Likewise,” said Harry.
“And who is this incredible Hogwarts student?”
“I’m afraid I couldn’t say.”
Somewhat to Harry’s surprise, Professor Quirrell made no objection
to this.
They walked in the direction of the Gringotts building, thinking, for
they were neither of them the sort of person who would give up on the
problem without considering it for at least ﬁve minutes.
“I have a feeling,” Harry said ﬁnally, “that we’re coming at this from
the wrong angle. There’s a tale I once heard about some students who
came into a physics class, and the teacher showed them a large metal
plate near a ﬁre. She ordered them to feel the metal plate, and they felt
that the metal nearer the ﬁre was cooler, and the metal further away was
*

454 *

**
*

NOTICING CONFUSION

*
*

*

warmer. And she said, write down your guess for why this happens. So
some students wrote down ‘because of how the metal conducts heat’,
and some students wrote down ‘because of how the air moves’, and no
one said ‘this just seems impossible’, and the real answer was that before
the students came into the room, the teacher turned the plate around.”
“Interesting,” said Professor Quirrell. “That does sound similar. Is
there a moral?”
“That your strength as a rationalist is your ability to be more confused by ﬁction than by reality,” said Harry. “If you’re equally good
at explaining any outcome, you have zero knowledge. The students
thought they could use words like ‘because of heat conduction’ to explain anything, even a metal plate being cooler on the side nearer the
ﬁre. So they didn’t notice how confused they were, and that meant they
couldn’t be more confused by falsehood than by truth. If you tell me
that the centaurs were under the Imperius Curse, I still have the feeling
of something being not quite right. I notice that I’m still confused even
after hearing your explanation.”
“Hm,” said Professor Quirrell.
They walked on further.
“I don’t suppose,” said Harry, “that it’s possible to actually swap people into alternate universes? Like, this isn’t our own Rita Skeeter, or they
temporarily sent her somewhere else?”
“If that was possible,” Professor Quirrell said, his voice rather dry,
“would I still be here?”
And just as they were almost to the huge white front of the Gringotts
building, Professor Quirrell said:
“Ah. Of course. I see it now. Let me guess, the Weasley twins?”
“What?” said Harry, his voice going up another octave in pitch.
“How?”
“I’m afraid I couldn’t say.”
“...That is not fair.”
“I think it is extremely fair,” said Professor Quirrell, and they entered
through the bronze doors.

**
*
*

455 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

The time was just before noon, and Harry and Professor Quirrell were
seated at the foot and head of a wide, long, ﬂat table, in a sumptuously
appointed private room with thoroughly cushioned couches and chairs
along the walls, and soft curtains hanging everywhere.
They were about to eat lunch in Mary’s Place, which Professor Quirrell had said was known to him as one of the best restaurants in Diagon
Alley, especially for—his voice had dropped meaningfully—certain purposes.
It was the nicest restaurant that Harry had ever been in, and it was
really eating away at Harry that Professor Quirrell was treating him to
the meal.
The ﬁrst part of the mission, to ﬁnd an Occlumency instructor, had
been a success. Professor Quirrell, smiling evilly, had told Griphook to
recommend the best he knew, and not worry about the expense, since
Dumbledore was paying it; and the goblin had smiled in return. There
might have been a certain amount of smiling on Harry’s part as well.
The second part of the plan had been a complete failure.
Harry was not allowed to take money out of his vault without Headmaster Dumbledore or some other school oﬃcial present, and Professor
Quirrell had not been given the vault key. Harry’s Muggle parents could
not authorize it because they were Muggles, and Muggles had around the
same legal standing as children or kittens: they were cute, so if you tortured them in public you could get arrested, but they weren’t people.
Some reluctant provision had been made for recognizing the parents of
Muggleborns as human in a limited sense, but Harry’s adoptive parents
did not fall into that legal category.
It seemed that Harry was eﬀectively an orphan in the eyes of the
wizarding world. As such, the Headmaster of Hogwarts, or his designees within the school system, were Harry’s guardians until he graduated. Harry could breathe without Dumbledore’s permission, but only
so long as the Headmaster did not speciﬁcally prohibit it.
Harry had then asked if he could simply tell Griphook how to diversify his investments beyond stacks of gold coins sitting in his vault.
Griphook had stared blankly and asked what ‘diversify’ meant.
Banks, it seemed, did not make investments. Banks stored your gold
*

456 *

**
*

NOTICING CONFUSION

*
*

*

coins in secure vaults for an annual fee.
The wizarding world did not have a concept of stock. Or equity.
Or corporations. Businesses were run by families out of their personal
vaults.
Loans were made by rich people, not banks. Though Gringotts
would witness the contract, for a fee, and enforce its collection, for a
much larger fee.
Good rich people let their friends borrow money and pay it back
whenever. Bad rich people charged you interest.
There was no secondary market in loans.
Evil rich people charged you annual interest rates of at least 20%.
Harry had stood up, turned away, and rested his head against the
wall.
Harry had asked if he needed the Headmaster’s permission before he
could start a bank.
Professor Quirrell had interrupted at this point, saying that it was
time for lunch, and swiftly conducted a fuming Harry out of the bronze
doors of Gringotts, through Diagon Alley, and to a ﬁne restaurant called
Mary’s Place, where a room had been reserved for them. The owner
had looked shocked at seeing Professor Quirrell accompanied by Harry
Potter, but had conducted them to the room without complaint.
And Professor Quirrell had quite deliberately announced that he
would pay the bill, seeming to rather enjoy the look on Harry’s face.
“No,” said Professor Quirrell to the waitress, “we will not require
menus. I will have the daily special accompanied by a bottle of Chianti,
and Mr. Potter will have the Diracawl soup to start, followed by a plate
of Roopo balls, and treacle pudding for dessert.”
The waitress, clad in robes that still looked severe and formal while
being rather shorter than usual, bowed respectfully and departed, shutting the door behind her.
Professor Quirrell waved a hand in the direction of the door, and a
bolt slid shut. “Note the bolt on the inside. This room, Mr. Potter, is
known as Mary’s Room. It happens to be proof against all scrying, and I
do mean all; Dumbledore himself could detect nothing of what happens
here. Mary’s Room is used by two kinds of people. The ﬁrst sort are
*

457 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

engaged in illicit dalliances. And the second sort lead interesting lives.”
“Really,” said Harry.
Professor Quirrell nodded.
Harry’s lips were parted in anticipation. “It would be a waste to just
sit here and eat lunch, then, without doing anything special.”
Professor Quirrell grinned, then took out his wand and ﬂicked it
in the direction of the door. “Of course,” he said, “people who lead
interesting lives take precautions more thorough than the dalliers. I have
just sealed us in. Nothing will now pass in or out of this room—through
the crack under the door, for example. And...”
Professor Quirrell then spoke no fewer than four diﬀerent Charms,
none of which Harry recognized.
“Even that does not really suﬃce,” said Professor Quirrell. “If we
were doing anything of truly great import, it would be necessary to perform another twenty-three checks besides those. If, say, Rita Skeeter
knew or guessed that we would come here, it is possible that she could
be in this room wearing the true Cloak of Invisibility. Or she could be
an Animagus with a tiny form, perhaps. There are tests to rule out such
rare possibilities, but to perform all of them would be arduous. Still,
I wonder if I should do them anyway, just so as not to teach you bad
habits?” And Professor Quirrell tapped a ﬁnger on his cheek, looking
abstracted.
“It’s ﬁne,” Harry said, “I understand, and I’ll remember.” Though he
was a little disappointed that they weren’t doing anything of truly great
import.
“Very well,” Professor Quirrell said. He leaned back in his chair,
smiling broadly. “You wrought quite well today, Mr. Potter. The basic
notion was yours, I’m sure, even if you delegated the execution. I don’t
think we’ll be hearing much more from Rita Skeeter after this. Lucius
Malfoy will not be pleased with her failure. If she’s smart, she’ll ﬂee the
country the instant she realizes she’s been fooled.”
A sinking sensation began to dawn in Harry’s stomach. “Lucius was
behind Rita Skeeter...?”
“Oh, you didn’t realize that?” said Professor Quirrell.
Harry hadn’t thought about what would happen to Rita Skeeter af*

458 *

**
*

NOTICING CONFUSION

*
*

*

terward.
At all.
Not in the slightest.
But she would get ﬁred from her job, of course she would be ﬁred, she
might have children going through Hogwarts for all Harry knew, and
now it was worse, much worse—
“Is Lucius going to have her killed?” Harry said in a barely audible
voice. Somewhere in his head, the Sorting Hat was screaming at him.
Professor Quirrell smiled dryly. “If you have not dealt with journalists before, take it from me that the world gets a little brighter every
time one dies.”
Harry jumped out of his chair with a convulsive movement, he had
to ﬁnd Rita Skeeter and warn her before it was too late—
“Sit down,” Professor Quirrell said sharply. “No, Lucius won’t kill
her. But Lucius makes life extremely unpleasant for those who serve him
ill. Miss Skeeter will ﬂee and start her life over with a new name. Sit
down, Mr. Potter; there is nothing you can do at this point, and you
have a lesson to learn.”
Harry sat down, slowly. There was a disappointed, annoyed look
on Professor Quirrell’s face that was doing more to stop him than the
words.
“There are times,” Professor Quirrell said, his voice cutting, “when
I worry that your brilliant Slytherin mind is simply wasted on you. Repeat after me. Rita Skeeter was a vile, disgusting woman.”
“Rita Skeeter was a vile, disgusting woman,” Harry said. He wasn’t
comfortable saying it, but there didn’t seem to be any other possible
actions, none at all.
“Rita Skeeter tried to destroy my reputation, but I executed an ingenious plan and destroyed her reputation ﬁrst.”
“Rita Skeeter challenged me. She lost the game, and I won.”
“Rita Skeeter was an obstacle to my future plans. I had no choice but
to deal with her if I wanted those plans to succeed.”
“Rita Skeeter was my enemy.”
“I cannot possibly get anything done in life if I am not willing to
defeat my enemies.”
*

459 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

“I have defeated one of my enemies today.”
“I am a good boy.”
“I deserve a special reward.”
“Ah,” said Professor Quirrell, who had been grinning a benevolent
smile for the last few lines, “I see I have succeeded in catching your attention.”
That was true. And while Harry felt like he was being railroaded
into something—no, that wasn’t just a feeling, he had been railroaded—
he couldn’t deny that saying those things, and seeing Professor Quirrell’s
smile, did make him feel better.
Professor Quirrell reached into his robes, the gesture slow and deliberately signiﬁcant, and drew forth...
...a book.
It was diﬀerent from any book Harry had ever seen, the edges and
corners visibly misshapen; rough-hewn was the phrase that came to mind,
like it had been hacked out of a book mine.
“What is it?” breathed Harry.
“A diary,” said Professor Quirrell.
“Whose?”
“That of a famous person.” Professor Quirrell was smiling broadly.
“Okay...”
Professor Quirrell’s expression became more serious. “Mr. Potter,
one of the requisites for becoming a powerful wizard is an excellent
memory. The key to a puzzle is often something you read twenty years
ago in an old scroll, or a peculiar ring you saw on the ﬁnger of a man you
met only once. I mention this to explain how I managed to remember
this item, and the placard attached to it, after meeting you a good deal
later. You see, Mr. Potter, over the course of my life, I have viewed a
number of private collections held by individuals who are, perhaps, not
quite deserving of all that they have—”
“You stole it?” Harry said incredulously.
“That is correct,” said Professor Quirrell. “Very recently, in fact. I
think you will appreciate this particular item much more than the vile
little man who held it for no other purpose than impressing his equally
vile friends with its rarity.”
*

460 *

**
*

NOTICING CONFUSION

*
*

*

Harry was simply gaping now.
“But if you feel that my actions were incorrect, Mr. Potter, I suppose
you needn’t accept your special present. Though of course I shan’t go to
the trouble of stealing it back. So which is it to be?”
Professor Quirrell tossed the book from one hand to another, causing
Harry to reach out involuntarily with a look of dismay.
“Oh,” said Professor Quirrell, “don’t worry about a little rough handling. You could toss this diary in a ﬁreplace and it would emerge unscathed. In any case, I await your decision.”
Professor Quirrell casually threw the book up into the air and caught
it again, grinning.
No, said Gryﬃndor and Huﬄepuﬀ.
Yes, said Ravenclaw. What part of the word ‘book’ did you two not
understand?
The theft part, said Huﬄepuﬀ.
Oh, come on, said Ravenclaw, you can’t seriously ask us to say no and
spend the rest of our life wondering what it was.
It sounds like a net positive from a utilitarian standpoint, said
Slytherin. Think of it as an economic transaction which generates gains
from trade, only without the trade part. Plus, we didn’t steal it and it won’t
help anyone to have Professor Quirrell keep it.
He’s trying to turn you Dark! shrieked Gryﬃndor, and Huﬄepuﬀ
nodded ﬁrmly.
Don’t be a naive little boy, said Slytherin, he’s trying to teach you
Slytherin.
Yeah, said Ravenclaw. Whoever owned the book originally was probably a Death Eater or something. It belongs with us.
Harry’s mouth opened, then halted that way, an agonized look on
his face.
Professor Quirrell seemed to be quite enjoying himself. He had balanced the book on its corner, on one ﬁnger, and was keeping it upright
while humming a little tune.
There came a knock at the door.
The book vanished back into Professor Quirrell’s robes, and he rose
up from his chair. Professor Quirrell started to walk over to the door—
*

461

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

—and staggered, suddenly lurching into the wall.
“It’s all right,” said Professor Quirrell’s voice, which suddenly sounded a lot weaker than usual. “Sit down, Mr. Potter, it’s just a dizzy spell.
Sit down.”
Harry’s ﬁngers gripped the edge of his chair, uncertain as to what
he should do, what he could do. Harry couldn’t even get too close to
Professor Quirrell, not unless he wanted to defy that sense of Doom—
Professor Quirrell straightened, then, his breathing seeming a bit
heavy, and opened the door.
The waitress came in, then, bearing a platter of food; and as she distributed the plates, Professor Quirrell walked slowly back to the table.
But by the time the waitress had bowed her way out, Professor Quirrell was sitting upright and smiling again.
Still, the brief episode of whatever-it-was had decided Harry. He
couldn’t say no, not after Professor Quirrell had gone to that much trouble.
“Yes,” Harry said.
Professor Quirrell held up a cautioning ﬁnger, then took out his
wand again, locked the door again, and repeated three of the same
Charms from earlier.
Then Professor Quirrell took the book back out of his robes and
tossed it to Harry, who almost dropped it into his soup.
Harry shot Professor Quirrell a look of helpless indignation. You
weren’t supposed to do that with books, enchanted or not.
Harry opened the book with ingrained, instinctive care. The pages
seemed too thick, with a texture unlike either Muggle paper or wizarding
parchment. And the contents were...
...blank?
“Am I supposed to be seeing—”
“Look nearer the beginning,” said Professor Quirrell, and Harry
(again with that helpless, ingrained care) turned a block of pages back.
The lettering was obviously handwritten, and very hard to read, but
Harry thought the words might be Latin.
“What is this?” said Harry.
“That,” said Professor Quirrell, “is a record of the magical researches
*

462 *

**
*

NOTICING CONFUSION

*
*

*

of a Muggleborn who never came to Hogwarts. He refused his letter,
and conducted his own small investigations, which never did get very
far without a wand. From the description on the placard, I expect that
his name bears rather more signiﬁcance to you than to me. That, Harry
Potter, is the diary of Roger Bacon.”
Harry almost fainted.
Nestled up against the wall, where Professor Quirrell had stumbled,
glistened the crushed remains of a beautiful blue beetle.

*

463 *

CHAPTER

TWENT Y-SE V EN

EMPATH Y
t wasn’t every day you got to see Harry Potter beg.
“Pleeaaase,” whined Harry Potter.
Fred and George shook their heads again, smiling.
There was an agonized look on Harry Potter’s face. “But I told you
how I did the one with Kevin Entwhistle’s cat, and Hermione and the
vanishing soda, and I can’t tell you about the Sorting Hat or the Remembrall or Professor Snape...”
Fred and George shrugged and turned to leave.
“If you ever do ﬁgure it out,” said the Weasley twins, “be sure to let
us know.”
“You’re evil! You’re both evil!”
Fred and George ﬁrmly closed the door to the empty classroom behind them, and made sure to keep the grin on their faces for a while, just
in case Harry Potter could see through doors.
Then they turned a corner and their faces sagged.
“I don’t suppose Harry’s guesses—”
“—gave you any ideas?” they said to each other at the same time, and
then their shoulders slumped further.
Their last relevant memory was of Flume refusing to help them,
though they couldn’t remember what they’d asked him to do...
...but they must have looked elsewhere and found someone to help
them do something illegal, or they wouldn’t have agreed to be Obliviated
afterward.
How had they possibly been able to get all that done on just forty
Galleons?

I

*

465 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

At ﬁrst they’d worried that they’d forged evidence so good that
Harry actually would end up married to Ginny... but they’d thought
of that too, it seemed. The Wizengamot proceedings had been tampered with again to put them back the way they’d been originally, the
fake betrothal contract had vanished from its dragon-guarded vault in
Gringotts, and so on. It was pretty scary, actually. Most people now
thought the Daily Prophet had just made the whole thing up for unguessable reasons, and the Quibbler had helpfully twisted the knife deeper
with the next day’s headline,
Harry Potter secretly betrothed to Luna Lovegood.
Whoever they’d hired would tell them after the statute of limitations
expired, they desperately hoped. But meanwhile it was awful, they’d
pulled their greatest prank ever, maybe the greatest prank in the history
of pranking, and they couldn’t remember how. It was crazy, they’d been
able to think of a way the ﬁrst time, so why couldn’t they see it now
after knowing everything they’d done?
Their only consolation was that Harry didn’t know they didn’t
know.
Not even Mum had questioned them about it, despite the obvious
Weasley connection. Whatever had been done, it was far out of the
reach of any Hogwarts student... except possibly one, who, if certain
rumors were true, might have done it by snapping his ﬁngers. Harry
had been questioned under Veritaserum, he’d told them... with Dumbledore present and giving the Aurors scary looks. The Aurors had asked
just enough to determine that Harry hadn’t pulled the prank himself or
disappeared anyone, and then gotten the heck out of Hogwarts.
Fred and George had wondered whether to feel insulted about Harry
Potter being questioned by the Aurors for their prank, but the look
on Harry’s face, probably for exactly the same reason, made everything
worth it.
Unsurprisingly, Rita Skeeter and the editor of the Daily Prophet had
both vanished and were probably in another country by now. They
would’ve liked to be able to tell their family about that part. Dad would
*

466 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

have congratulated them, they thought, after Mum had ﬁnished killing
them and Ginny had burned the remains.
But everything was still all right, they’d tell Dad someday, and meanwhile...
...meanwhile Dumbledore had happened to sneeze while passing
them in the hallway, and a small package had accidentally dropped out of
his pockets, and inside had been two matched wardbreaker’s monocles
of incredible quality. The Weasley twins had tested their new monocles
on the “forbidden” third-ﬂoor corridor, making a quick trip to the magic
mirror and back, and they hadn’t been able to see all the detection webs
clearly, but the monocles had shown a lot more than they’d seen the ﬁrst
time.
Of course they would have to be very careful never to get caught with
the monocles in their possession, or they would end up in the Headmaster’s oﬃce getting a stern lecture and maybe even threats of expulsion.
It was good to know that not everyone who got Sorted into Gryfﬁndor grew up to be Professor McGonagall.

**
*
Harry was in a white room, windowless, featureless, sitting before a
desk, facing an expressionless man in formal robes of solid black.
The room was screened against detection, and the man had performed exactly twenty-seven spells before saying so much as “Hello,
Mr. Potter.”
It was oddly appropriate that the man in black was about to try reading Harry’s mind.
“Prepare yourself,” the man said tonelessly.
A human mind, Harry’s Occlumency book had said, was only exposed to a Legilimens along certain surfaces. If you failed to defend your
surfaces, the Legilimens would go through and be able to access any part
of you which their own mind was able to comprehend...
...which tended not to be much. Human minds, it seemed, were
hard for humans to understand on any level but the shallowest. Harry
*

467 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

had wondered if knowing lots of cognitive science could make him an incredibly powerful Legilimens, but repeated experience had ﬁnally driven
into him the lesson that he needed to get a little less excited in his anticipations about this sort of thing. It wasn’t as if any cognitive scientist
understood humans well enough to make one.
To learn the counter, Occlumency, the ﬁrst step was to imagine yourself to be a diﬀerent person, pretending it as thoroughly as you could,
immersing yourself entirely in that alternate persona. You wouldn’t always have to do that, but in the beginning, it was how you learned where
your surfaces were. The Legilimens would try to read you, and you
would feel it happening if you paid close enough attention, you would
sense them trying to enter. And your job was to make sure that they
always touched your imaginary persona and not the real one.
When you were good enough at that, you could imagine being a very
simple sort of person, pretend to be a rock, and make a habit of leaving
the pretense in place where all your surfaces were. That was a standard
Occlumency barrier. Pretending to be a rock was hard to learn, but easy
to do afterward, and the exposed surface of a mind was much shallower
than its interior, so with enough practice you could keep it up as a background habit.
Or if you were a perfect Occlumens, you could race ahead of any
probes, answering queries as fast as they were asked, so that the Legilimens would enter through your surfaces and see a mind indistinguishable
from whoever you were pretending to be.
Even the best Legilimens could be fooled that way. If a perfect Occlumens claimed they were dropping their Occlumency barriers, there
was no way to know if they were lying. Worse, you might not know
you were dealing with a perfect Occlumens. They were rare, but the
fact that they existed meant you couldn’t trust Legilimency on anyone.
It was a sad commentary on how little human beings understood
each other, how little any wizard comprehended the depths lying beneath the mind’s surface, that you could fool the best human telepaths
by pretending to be someone else.
But then human beings only understood each other in the ﬁrst place
by pretending. You didn’t make predictions about people by modeling
*

468 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

the hundred trillion synapses in their brain as separate objects. Ask the
best social manipulator on Earth to build you an Artiﬁcial Intelligence
from scratch, and they’d just give you a dumb look. You predicted people by telling your brain to act like theirs. You put yourself in their place.
If you wanted to know what an angry person would do, you activated
your own brain’s anger circuitry, and whatever that circuitry output,
that was your prediction. What did the neural circuitry for anger actually look like inside? Who knew? The best social manipulator on
Earth might not know what neurons were, and neither might the best
Legilimens.
Anything a Legilimens could understand, an Occlumens could pretend to be. It was the same trick either way—probably implemented by
the same neural circuitry in both cases, a single set of control circuits for
reconﬁguring your own brain to act as a model of someone else’s.
And so the race between telepathic oﬀense and telepathic defense had
been a decisive win for defense. Otherwise the entire magical world,
maybe even the whole Earth, would have been a very diﬀerent place...
Harry took a deep breath, and concentrated. There was a slight smile
on his face.
For once, just once, Harry hadn’t gotten shortchanged in the mysterious powers department.
After almost a month of work, and more on a whim than any real
hunch, Harry had decided to make himself coldly angry and then try
the book’s Occlumency exercises again. At that point he’d mostly given
up hope on that sort of thing, but it had still seemed worth a quick try—
He’d run through all the book’s hardest exercises in two hours, and
the next day he’d gone and told Professor Quirrell he was ready.
His dark side, it had turned out, was very, very good at pretending
to be other people.
Harry thought of his standard trigger, from the ﬁrst time he’d gone
over entirely to his dark side...
Severus paused, looking quite pleased with himself. “And that will be...
ﬁve points? No, let us make it an even ten points from Ravenclaw for
backchat.”
Harry’s smile grew chillier, and he regarded the black-robed man
*

469 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

who thought he was going to read Harry’s mind.
And then Harry turned into someone else entirely, someone who
had seemed appropriate to the occasion.
...in a white room, windowless, featureless, sitting before a desk, facing an expressionless man in formal robes of solid black.
Kimball Kinnison regarded the black-robed man who thought he was
going to read the mind of a Second-Stage Lensman of the Galactic Patrol.
To say that Kimball Kinnison was conﬁdent of the outcome would
be an understatement. He had been trained by Mentor of Arisia, the
most powerful mind known to this or any other universe, and the mere
wizard sitting across from him would see precisely what the Gray Lensman wanted him to see...
...the mind of the boy he was currently disguised as, an innocent child
named Harry Potter.
“I’m ready,” said Kimball Kinnison in nervous tones that were exactly appropriate for an eleven-year-old boy.
“Legilimens,” said the black-robed wizard.
There was a pause.
The black-robed wizard blinked, as if he’d seen something so shocking that it had been enough to make even his eyelids move. His voice
wasn’t quite toneless as he said, “The Boy-Who-Lived has a mysterious
dark side?”
The heat slowly crept up into Harry’s cheeks.
“Well,” the man said. His face had now settled back into perfect calm.
“Excuse me. Mr. Potter, it is good to know your advantages, but that is
not the same as being wildly overconﬁdent in them. You may indeed be
able to learn Occlumency at eleven years of age. This astounds me. I
had thought Mr. Dumbledore was pretending to be insane again. Your
dissociative talent is so strong that I am surprised to ﬁnd no other signs
of childhood abuse, and you may become a perfect Occlumens in time.
But there is a considerable diﬀerence between that and expecting to put
up a successful Occlumency barrier on your ﬁrst attempt. That is merely
ridiculous. Did you feel anything as I read your mind?”
Harry shook his head, now blushing furiously.
“Then pay closer attention next time. The goal is not to create a
*

470 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

perfect image on your ﬁrst day of lessons. The goal is to learn where
your surfaces are. Prepare yourself.”
Harry tried to pretend to be Kimball Kinnison again, tried to pay
more attention, but his thoughts were a little scattered and he was suddenly aware of all the things he shouldn’t be thinking about...
Oh, this was going to suck.
Harry gritted his teeth. At least the instructor would be Obliviated
afterward.
“Legilimens.”
There was a pause—

**
*
...in a white room, windowless, featureless, sitting before a desk, facing
an expressionless man in formal robes of solid black.
It was their fourth day, on a Sunday evening. When you paid this
much, you got your sessions any darned time you wanted, never mind
the concept of weekends.
“Hello, Mr. Potter,” the telepath said tonelessly, having cast the full
suite of privacy spells.
“Hello, Mr. Bester,” Harry said wearily. “Let’s just get the initial
shock out of the way, shall we?”
“You managed to surprise me?” the man said, now sounding slightly
interested. “Well then.” He pointed his wand and stared into Harry’s
eyes. “Legilimens.”
There was a pause, and then the black-robed wizard jerked as if someone had touched him with a cattle prod.
“The Dark Lord is alive?” he choked. His eyes were suddenly wild.
“Dumbledore turns himself invisible and sneaks into girls’ dorm rooms?”
Harry sighed and looked down at his watch. In about another three
seconds...
“So,” the man said. He hadn’t quite recovered his tonelessness. “You
genuinely believe you’re going to discover the secret rules of magic and
become all-powerful.”
*

471

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

“That’s right,” Harry said evenly, still looking at his watch. “I’m that
overconﬁdent.”
“I wonder. It seems the Sorting Hat thinks you’ll be the next Dark
Lord.”
“And you know I’m trying pretty hard not to be, and you saw that we
already had a long discussion about whether you were willing to teach
me Occlumency, and in the end you decided to do it, so can we just get
this over with?”
“All right,” said the man exactly six seconds later, same as last time.
“Prepare yourself.” He paused, and then said, his voice rather wistful,
“Though I do wish I could remember that trick with the gold and silver.”
Harry was ﬁnding himself very disturbed by how reproducible human thoughts were when you reset people back to the same initial conditions and exposed them to the same stimuli. It was dispelling illusions
that a good reductionist wasn’t supposed to have in the ﬁrst place.

**
*
Harry was in a rather bad mood as he stomped out of his Herbology
class the next Monday morning.
Hermione was seething alongside him.
The other children were still inside, a bit slow to assemble their
things because they were gibbering excitedly to each other about Ravenclaw winning the year’s second Quidditch match.
It seemed that last night after dinner, a girl had ﬂown around on
a broomstick for thirty minutes and then caught some sort of giant
mosquito. There were other facts about what had happened during this
match, but they were irrelevant.
Harry had missed this exciting sports event due to his Occlumency
lesson, and also having a life.
He had then avoided all conversations in the Ravenclaw dorm,
weren’t Quieting Charms and magical trunks wonderful. He had eaten
breakfast at the Gryﬃndor table.
*

472 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

But Harry couldn’t avoid Herbology, and the Ravenclaws had talked
about it before class, and after class, and during class, until Harry had
looked up from the baby furcot whose diaper he was changing, and announced loudly that some of them were trying to learn about plants
and Snitches didn’t grow on anything so could they all please shut up
about Quidditch. Everyone else present had given him shocked looks,
except Hermione, who’d looked like she wanted to applaud, and Professor Sprout, who had awarded him a point for Ravenclaw.
A point for Ravenclaw.
One point.
The seven idiots on their idiot brooms playing their idiot game had
earned one hundred and ninety points for Ravenclaw.
It seemed that Quidditch scores added directly onto the House points
total.
In other words, catching a golden mosquito was worth 150 House
points.
Harry couldn’t even imagine what he would have to do to earn one
hundred and ﬁfty House points.
Besides, y’know, rescuing a hundred and ﬁfty Huﬄepuﬀs, or coming
up with ﬁfteen ideas as good as putting protective shells on time machines, or
inventing one thousand ﬁve hundred creative ways to kill people, or being
Hermione Granger for the entire year.
“We should kill them,” Harry said to Hermione, who was walking
beside him with an equally oﬀended air.
“Who?” said Hermione. “The Quidditch team?”
“I was thinking of everyone involved in any way with Quidditch
anywhere, but the Ravenclaw team would be a start, yes.”
Hermione’s lips were pursed disapprovingly. “You do know that
killing people is wrong, Harry?”
“Yes,” Harry said.
“Okay, just checking,” Hermione said. “Let’s get the Seeker ﬁrst.
I’ve read some Agatha Christie mysteries, do you know how we can get
her onto a train?”
“Two students plotting murder,” said a dry voice. “How shocking.”
From around a nearby corner strolled a man in lightly spotted robes,
*

473 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

his greasy hair falling long and unkempt about his shoulders. Deadly
danger seemed to radiate out from him, ﬁlling the hallway with improperly mixed potions and accidental falls and people dying in bed of what
the Aurors would rule to be natural causes.
Without thinking about it at all, Harry stepped in front of Hermione.
There was an intake of breath from behind him, and then a moment
later Hermione brushed past and stepped in front of him. “Run, Harry!”
she said. “Boys shouldn’t have to be in danger.”
Severus Snape smiled mirthlessly. “Amusing. I request a moment
of your time, Potter, if you can tear yourself away from your ﬂirtations
with Miss Granger.”
Suddenly there was a very worried look on Hermione’s face. She
turned to Harry and opened her mouth, then paused, looking distressed.
“Oh, don’t worry, Miss Granger,” said Severus’s silky voice. “I
promise to return your beau unmaimed.” His smile vanished. “Now
Potter and I are about to go oﬀ and have a private conversation, just by
ourselves. I hope it is clear that you are not invited, but just in case,
consider that an order from a Hogwarts professor. I’m sure a good little
girl like you won’t disobey.”
And Severus turned and walked back around the corner. “Coming,
Potter?” his voice said.
“Um,” Harry said to Hermione. “Can I just sort of go oﬀ and follow
him and let you work out what I should say to make sure you’re not all
worried and oﬀended?”
“No,” Hermione said, her voice trembling.
Severus’s laughter echoed from around the corner.
Harry bowed his head. “Sorry,” he said lowly, “really,” and he went
oﬀ after the Potions Master.

**
*
“So,” Harry said. There were no other sounds now but two pairs of legs,
the long and the short, padding across a random stone corridor. The
Potions Master was striding quickly but not too fast for Harry to keep
*

474 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

up, and insofar as Harry could apply the concept of directionality to
Hogwarts, they were moving away from the frequented areas. “What’s
this about?”
“I don’t suppose you could explain,” Severus said dryly, “why the
two of you were plotting to murder Cho Chang?”
“I don’t suppose you could explain,” Harry said dryly, “in your capacity as an oﬃcial of the Hogwarts school system, why catching a
golden mosquito is deemed an academic accomplishment worthy of a
hundred and ﬁfty House points?”
A smile crossed Severus’s lips. “Dear me, and I thought you were
supposed to be perceptive. Are you truly so incapable of understanding your classmates, Potter, or do you dislike them too much to try?
If Quidditch scores did not count toward the House Cup then none of
them would care about House points at all. It would merely be an obscure contest for students like you and Miss Granger.”
It was a shockingly good answer.
And that shock brought Harry’s mind fully awake.
In retrospect it shouldn’t have been surprising that Severus understood his students, understood them very well indeed.
He had been reading their minds.
And...
...the book said that a successful Legilimens was extremely rare, rarer
than a perfect Occlumens, because almost no one had enough mental
discipline.
Mental discipline?
Harry had collected stories about a man who routinely lost his temper in class and blew up at young children.
...but this same man, when Harry had spoken of the Dark Lord still
being alive, had responded instantly and perfectly—reacting in precisely
the way that someone completely ignorant would react.
The man stalked about Hogwarts with the air of an assassin, radiating
danger...
...which was exactly not what a real assassin should do. Real assassins
should look like meek little accountants until they killed you.
He was the Head of House for proud and aristocratic Slytherin, and
*

475 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

he wore a robe with spotted stains from bits of potions and ingredients,
which two minutes of magic could have removed.
Harry noticed that he was confused.
And his threat estimate of the Head of House Slytherin shot up astronomically.
Dumbledore had seemed to think Severus was his, and there’d been
nothing to contradict that; the Potions Master had been “scary but not
abusive”, as promised. So, Harry had reasoned earlier, this was Fellowship business. If Severus had been planning harm, surely he wouldn’t
have come to get Harry in front of Hermione, a witness, when he could
have simply waited for some time when Harry was alone...
Harry quietly bit his lip.
“I once knew a boy who truly adored Quidditch,” said Severus Snape.
“He was an utter pillock. Just as you and I would expect, we two.”
“What is this?” Harry said slowly.
“Patience, Potter.”
Severus turned his head, and then glided with his assassin’s bearing
into a nearby opening in the corridor walls, a smaller and narrower hallway leading oﬀ.
Harry followed him, wondering if it would be smarter to simply run
away.
They turned and made another turn, and came to a dead end, a simple
blank wall. If Hogwarts had actually been built, rather than conjured or
summoned or birthed or whatever, Harry would have had some sharp
words for the architect about paying people to build hallways that didn’t
go anywhere.
“Quietus,” said Severus, and a few other things as well.
Harry leaned back, folded his arms across his chest, and watched
Severus’s face.
“Looking me in the eyes, Potter?” said Severus Snape. “Your Occlumency lessons cannot have progressed far enough for you to block
Legilimency. But then perhaps they have progressed far enough for you
to detect it. Since I cannot know otherwise, I will not risk trying.” The
man smiled thinly. “And the same will hold for Dumbledore, I think.
Which is why we are now having this little talk.”
*

476 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

Harry’s eyes widened involuntarily.
“To begin with,” Severus said, eyes glittering, “I should like you to
promise not to speak of our conversations to anyone. So far as the school
is concerned, we are discussing your Potions homework. Whether or not
they believe that is unimportant. So far as Dumbledore and McGonagall
are concerned, I am violating Draco Malfoy’s conﬁdences in me, and
neither of us think it proper to speak further of the particulars.”
Harry’s brain tried to calculate the ramiﬁcations and implications of
this and ran out of swap space.
“Well?” said the Potions Master.
“All right,” Harry said slowly. It was hard to see how having a conversation and being unable to tell anyone could be more constraining
than not having it, in which case you also couldn’t tell anyone the contents. “I promise.”
Severus was watching Harry intently. “You said once in the Headmaster’s oﬃce that you would not tolerate bullying or abuse. And so I
wonder, Harry Potter. Just how much do you resemble your father?”
“Unless we’re talking about Michael Verres-Evans,” Harry said, “the
answer is that I know very little about James Potter.”
Severus nodded, as though to himself. “There is a ﬁfth-year
Slytherin. A boy named Lesath Lestrange. He is being bullied by
Gryﬃndors. I am... constrained, in my ability to deal with such situations. You could help him, perhaps. If you wished. I am not asking
you for a favor, and will not owe you one. It is simply an opportunity
to do as you will.”
Harry stared at Severus, thinking.
“Wondering if it’s a trap?” said Severus, a faint smile crossing his lips.
“It is not. It is a test. Call it curiosity on my part. But Lesath’s troubles
are real, as are my own diﬃculties in intervening.”
That was the trouble with other people knowing you were a good
guy. Even if you knew they knew, you still couldn’t ignore the bait.
And if his father had protected students from bullies too... it didn’t
matter if Harry knew why Severus had told him. It still made him feel
warm inside, and proud, and made it impossible to walk away.
“Fine,” Harry said. “Tell me about Lesath. Why is he being bullied?”
*

477 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

Severus’s face lost the faint smile. “You think there are reasons, Potter?”
“Perhaps not,” Harry said quietly. “But the thought had occurred to
me that he might have pushed some unimportant mudblood girl down
the stairs.”
“Lesath Lestrange,” Severus said, his voice now cold, “is the son
of Bellatrix Black, the most fanatic and evil servant of the Dark Lord.
Lesath is the acknowledged bastard of Rastaban Lestrange. Shortly after the Dark Lord’s death, Bellatrix and Rastaban and Rastaban’s brother
Rodolphus were captured while torturing Alice and Frank Longbottom.
All three are in Azkaban for life. The Longbottoms were driven insane
by repeated Cruciatus and remain in St. Mungo’s incurable ward. Is any
of that a good reason to bully him, Potter?”
“It is no reason at all,” Harry said, still quietly. “And Lesath himself
has done no wrong that you know?”
The faint smile crossed Severus’s lips again. “He is no more a saint
than anyone else. But he has pushed no mudblood girls down the stairs,
not that I ever heard.”
“Or saw in his mind,” said Harry.
Severus’s expression was chill. “I did not invade his privacy, Potter. I
looked within the Gryﬃndors, rather. He is simply a convenient target
for their little satisfactions.”
A cold wash of anger ran down Harry’s spine, and he had to remind
himself that Severus might not be a trustworthy source of information.
“And you think,” Harry said, “that an intervention by Harry Potter,
the Boy-Who-Lived, might prove eﬀective.”
“Indeed,” said Severus Snape, and told Harry when and where the
Gryﬃndors were planning their next little game.

**
*
There is a main hallway running through the middle of Hogwarts’s second ﬂoor on the north-south axis, and near the center of this hallway
there is an opening into a short corridor which goes a dozen paces back
*

478 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

before turning at a right angle, making an L-shape, and then goes a dozen
paces more before it ends at a bright, wide window, looking out from
three stories above upon the light drizzle falling over the east grounds of
Hogwarts. Standing by the window you can hear nothing of the main
hallway, and no one in the hallway would hear what went on by the window. If you think there is anything odd about this, you haven’t been in
Hogwarts very long.
Four boys in red-trimmed robes are laughing, and a boy in greentrimmed robes is screaming and grabbing frantically onto the edges of
the opened window with his hands, as the four boys make as though to
push him out. It’s just a joke, of course, and besides, a fall from that
height wouldn’t kill a wizard. All good fun. If you think there is anything odd about this—
“What are you doing?” says a sixth boy’s voice.
The four boys in red-trimmed robes spin around with sudden starts,
and the boy in green-trimmed robes frantically pushes himself away from
the window and falls to the ﬂoor, face streaked with tears.
“Oh,” says the most handsome of the boys in red-trimmed robes,
sounding relieved, “it’s you. Hey, Lessy, you know who this is?”
There isn’t any answer from the boy on the ﬂoor, who’s trying to get
his sniﬄing under control, and the boy in the red-trimmed robes draws
back his leg for a kick—
“Stop it!” shouts the sixth boy.
The boy in the red-trimmed robes wobbles as he aborts the kick.
“Um,” he says, “do you know who this is?”
The sixth boy’s breathing sounds strange. “Lesath Lestrange,” he
says, his breath coming in short pants, “and he didn’t do anything to my
parents, he was ﬁve years old.”

**
*
Neville Longbottom stared at the four huge ﬁfth-year bullies in front of
him, trying very hard to control his trembling.
He should have just told Harry Potter no.
*

479 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

“Why are you defending him?” said the handsome one, slowly, sounding puzzled with the ﬁrst hints of oﬀense. “He’s a Slytherin. And a
Lestrange.”
“He’s a boy who lost his parents,” said Neville Longbottom. “I
know how that is.” He didn’t know where the words had come from. It
sounded too cool, like something Harry Potter would say.
The trembling went on, though.
“Who do you think you are?” said the handsome one, starting to
sound angry.
I am Neville, the last scion of the Noble and Most Ancient House of Longbottom—
Neville couldn’t say it.
“I think he’s a traitor,” said one of the other Gryﬃndors, and there
was a sudden sinking sensation in Neville’s stomach.
He’d known it, he’d just known it. Harry Potter had been wrong
after all. Bullies wouldn’t stop only because Neville Longbottom told
them to stop.
The handsome one took a step forward, and the three others followed.
“So that’s how it is for you,” Neville said, amazed at how steady his
voice was. “It doesn’t matter to you if it’s Lesath Lestrange or Neville
Longbottom.”
Lesath Lestrange let out a sudden gasp, from where he was lying on
the ﬂoor.
“Evil is evil,” snarled the same boy who’d spoken before, “and if
you’re friends with evil, you’re evil too.”
The four took another step forward.
Lesath rose, wobbling, to his feet. His face was gray, and he took a
few steps forward, and leaned against the wall, and didn’t say anything.
His eyes were ﬁxed on the turn in the hallway, the way out.
“Friends,” Neville said. Now his voice was going up a bit in pitch.
“Yes, I have friends. One of them is the Boy-Who-Lived.”
A couple of the Gryﬃndors looked suddenly worried. The handsome one didn’t ﬂinch. “Harry Potter isn’t here,” he said, his voice hard,
“and if he was, I don’t think he’d like to see a Longbottom defending a
*

480 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

Lestrange.”
And the Gryﬃndors took another long step forward, and behind
them, Lesath crept along the wall, waiting for his chance.
Neville swallowed, and raised his right hand with his thumb and
foreﬁnger pressed together.
He shut his eyes, because Harry Potter had made him promise not
to peek.
If this didn’t work, he was never trusting anyone again.
His voice came out surprisingly clear, considering.
“Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres. Harry James Potter-EvansVerres. Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres. By the debt that you owe
me and the power of your true name I summon you, I open the way for
you, I call upon you to manifest yourself before me.”
Neville snapped his ﬁngers.
And then Neville opened his eyes.
Lesath Lestrange was staring at him.
The four Gryﬃndors were staring at him.
The handsome one started to chuckle, and that set oﬀ the other three.
“Was Harry Potter supposed to step around the corner or something?” said the handsome one. “Aw. Looks like you’ve been stood
up.”
The handsome one took a menacing step forward toward Neville.
The other three followed in lockstep.
“Ahem,” said Harry Potter from behind them, leaning against the
wall by the window, in the dead end of the hallway, where nobody could
possibly have gotten to without being seen.
If watching people scream always felt this good, Neville could sort
of understand why people became bullies.
Harry Potter stalked forward, placing himself between Lesath Lestrange and the others. He swept his icy gaze across the boys in redtrimmed robes, and then his eyes came to rest on the handsome one, the
ringleader. “Mr. Carl Sloper,” said Harry Potter. “I believe I have comprehended this situation fully. If Lesath Lestrange has ever committed a
single evil himself, rather than being born to the wrong parents, the fact
is not known to you. If I am mistaken in this, Mr. Sloper, I suggest you
*

481

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

inform me at once.”
Neville saw the fear and awe on the other boys’ faces. He was feeling
it himself. Harry had claimed it would all be a trick, but how could it
be?
“But he’s a Lestrange,” said the ringleader.
“He’s a boy who lost his parents,” Harry Potter said, his voice growing
even colder.
This time all three of the other Gryﬃndors ﬂinched.
“So,” said Harry Potter. “You saw that Neville didn’t want you tormenting an innocent boy on behalf of the Longbottoms. This failed to
move you. If I tell you that the Boy-Who-Lived also thinks you are in the
wrong, that what you did today was a terrible mistake, does that make
a diﬀerence?”
The ringleader took a step toward Harry.
The others did not follow him.
“Carl,” one of them said, swallowing. “Maybe we should go.”
“They say you’re going to be the next Dark Lord,” the ringleader
said, staring at Harry.
A grin crossed Harry Potter’s face. “They also say I’m secretly betrothed to Ginevra Weasley and there’s a prophecy about us conquering
France.” The smile faded. “Since you’re determined to force the issue,
Mr. Carl Sloper, let me make things clear. Leave Lesath alone. I will
know if you don’t.”
“So Lessy snarked to you,” said the ringleader coldly.
“Sure,” said Harry Potter dryly, “and he also told me what you did
today after you left Charms class, in a private secluded place where no
one could see you, with a certain Huﬄepuﬀ girl wearing a white ribbon
in her hair—”
The ringleader’s jaw dropped in shock.
“Eep,” said one of the other Gryﬃndors in a high-pitched voice, and
spun on his heels and ran around the corner. His footsteps rapidly pattered away and faded.
And then there were six.
“Ah,” said Harry Potter, “there goes a slightly intelligent young man.
The rest of you could stand to learn from Bertram Kirke’s example, be*

482 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

fore you get into, shall we say, trouble.”
“Are you threatening to snark on us?” said the handsome Gryﬃndor,
his voice trying to be angry, and rather wavering. “Bad things happen
to snarkers.”
The other two Gryﬃndors started slowly moving back.
Harry Potter started laughing. “Oh, you did not just say that. Are
you really trying to intimidate me? Me? Now honestly, do you think
you’re scarier than Peregrine Derrick, Severus Snape or for that matter
You-Know-Who?”
Even the ringleader ﬂinched at that.
Harry Potter raised his hand, ﬁngers poised, and all three of the
Gryﬃndors leaped backward, and one of them blurted “Don’t—!”
“See,” said Harry Potter, “this is where I snap my ﬁngers and you
become part of a hilariously amusing story that will be told with much
nervous laughter at dinner tonight. But the thing is, people I trust keep
telling me not to do that. Professor McGonagall told me I was taking the
easy way out of everything and Professor Quirrell says I need to learn
how to lose. So you remember that story where I let myself get beaten
up by some older Slytherins? We could do that. You could bully me
for a while and I could let you. Only you remember that part at the end
where I tell my many, many friends inside this school not to do anything
about it? This time we’ll skip that part. So go ahead. Bully me.”
Harry Potter stepped forward, his arms opened wide in invitation.
The three Gryﬃndors broke and ran, and Neville had to sidestep
quickly to avoid getting run over.
There was silence, as their footsteps faded, and then more silence
after that.
And then there were three.
Harry Potter drew a deep breath, then exhaled. “Whew,” he said.
“How are you doing, Neville?”
Neville’s voice came out in a high-pitched squeak. “Okay, that was
really cool.”
A grin ﬂashed across Harry Potter’s face. “You were pretty cool too,
you know.”
Neville knew that Harry Potter was just saying that, trying to make
*

483 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

him feel good, and it still started a warm glow inside his chest.
Harry turned toward Lesath Lestrange—
“Are you okay, Lestrange?” said Neville before Harry could open his
mouth.
Now there was something you didn’t expect to ﬁnd yourself saying,
ever.
Lesath Lestrange turned slowly, and stared at Neville, his face tight,
no longer crying, tears glistening as they dried.
“You think you know how it is?” said Lesath, his voice high and
shaking. “You think you know? My parents are in Azkaban, I try not
to think about it and they always remind me, they think it’s great that
Mother is there in the cold and the dark with the Dementors sucking
away her life, I wish I was like Harry Potter, at least his parents aren’t
hurting, my parents are always hurting, every second of every day, I
wish I was like you, at least you can see your parents sometimes, at least
you know they loved you, if Mother ever loved me the Dementors will
have eaten that thought by now—”
Neville’s eyes were wide with shock. He hadn’t expected this.
Lesath turned to Harry Potter, whose eyes were full of horror.
Lesath ﬂung himself on the ﬂoor in front of Harry Potter, touched
his forehead to the ground, and whispered, “Help me, Lord.”
There was an awful silence. Neville couldn’t think of a single thing
to say, and from the naked shock on Harry’s face, he couldn’t think of
anything either.
“They say you can do anything, please, please my Lord, get my parents out of Azkaban, I’ll be your loyal servant forever, my life will be
yours and my death as well, only please—”
“Lesath,” Harry said, his voice breaking, “Lesath, I can’t, I can’t really do things like that, it’s all just stupid tricks.”
“It’s not!” said Lesath, his voice high and desperate. “I saw it, the
stories are true, you can!”
Harry swallowed. “Lesath, I set the whole thing up with Neville, we
planned it all out in advance, ask him!”
They had, though Harry hadn’t said how he was going to do any of
it...
*

484 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

When Lesath looked up from the ﬂoor his face was ghastly, and his
voice came out in a shriek that hurt Neville’s ears. “You son of a mudblood! You could get her out, you just won’t! I got down on my knees and
begged you and you still won’t help! I should have known, you’re the BoyWho-Lived, you think she belongs there!”
“I can’t!” Harry said, his voice as desperate as Lesath’s. “It’s not a
question of what I want, I don’t have the power!”
Lesath rose to his feet, and spat on the ﬂoor in front of Harry, and
then turned and walked away. When he was around the corner the sound
of his feet sped up, and as they faded Neville thought he heard a single
sob.
And then there were two.
Neville looked at Harry.
Harry looked at Neville.
“Wow,” Neville said quietly. “He didn’t seem very grateful for being
rescued.”
“He thought I could help him,” Harry said, his voice hoarse. “He
had hope for the ﬁrst time in years.”
Neville swallowed, and said it. “I’m sorry.”
“Wha?” said Harry, sounding totally confused.
“I wasn’t grateful when you helped me—”
“Every single thing you said before was completely right,” said the
Boy-Who-Lived.
“No,” Neville said, “it wasn’t.”
They simultaneously gave brief sad smiles, each condescending to the
other.
“I know this wasn’t real,” said Neville, “I know I couldn’t have done
anything if you hadn’t been here, but thanks for letting me pretend.”
“Give me a break,” said Harry.
Harry had turned from Neville, and was staring out the window at
the gloomy clouds.
A completely ridiculous thought came to Neville. “Are you feeling
guilty because you can’t get Lesath’s parents out of Azkaban?”
“No,” said Harry.
A few seconds went by.
*

485 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

“Yes,” said Harry.
“You’re silly,” said Neville.
“I am aware of this,” said Harry.
“Do you have to do literally anything anyone asks you?”
The Boy-Who-Lived turned back and looked at Neville again. “Do?
No. Feel guilty about not doing? Yes.”
Neville was having trouble ﬁnding words. “Once the Dark Lord
died, Bellatrix Black was literally the most evil person in the entire world
and that was before she went to Azkaban. She tortured my mother and
father into insanity because she wanted to ﬁnd out what happened to the
Dark Lord—”
“I know,” Harry said quietly. “I get that, but—”
“No! You don’t! She had a reason for doing that, and my parents
were both Aurors! It’s not even close to the worst thing she’s ever done!”
Neville’s voice was shaking.
“Even so,” said the Boy-Who-Lived, his eyes distant as they stared
oﬀ into somewhere else, some other place that Neville couldn’t imagine.
“There might be some incredibly clever solution that makes it possible
to save everyone and let them all live happily ever after, and if only I was
smart enough I would have thought of it by now—”
“You have problems,” said Neville. “You think you ought to be what
Lesath Lestrange thinks you are.”
“Yeah,” said the Boy-Who-Lived, “that pretty much nails it. Every
time someone cries out in prayer and I can’t answer, I feel guilty about
not being God.”
Neville didn’t quite understand that, but... “That doesn’t sound
good.”
Harry sighed. “I understand that I have a problem, and I know what
I need to do to solve it, all right? I’m working on it.”

**
*
Harry watched Neville leave.
Of course Harry hadn’t said what the solution was.
*

486 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

The solution, obviously, was to hurry up and become God.
Neville’s footsteps moved oﬀ, and soon could no longer be heard.
And then there was one.
“Ahem,” said Severus Snape’s voice from directly behind him.
Harry let out a small scream and instantly hated himself.
Slowly, Harry turned around.
The tall greasy man in the spotted robes was leaning against the wall
in the same position Harry had occupied.
“A ﬁne invisibility cloak, Potter,” drawled the Potions Master.
“Much is explained.”
Oh, bloody crap.
“And perhaps I have been in Dumbledore’s company too long,” said
Severus, “but I cannot help but wonder if that is the Cloak of Invisibility.”
Harry immediately turned into someone who’d never heard of the
Cloak of Invisibility and who was exactly as smart as Harry thought
Severus thought Harry was.
“Oh, possibly,” said Harry. “I trust you realize the implications, if it
is?”
Severus’s voice was condescending. “You have no idea what I’m talking about, do you, Potter? A rather clumsy try at ﬁshing.”
(Professor Quirrell had remarked over their lunch that Harry really
needed to conceal his state of mind better than putting on a blank face
when someone discussed a dangerous topic, and had explained about
one-level deceptions, two-level deceptions, and so on. So either Severus
was in fact modeling Harry as a one-level player, which made Severus
himself two-level, and Harry’s three-level move had been successful; or
Severus was a four-level player and wanted Harry to think the deception
had been successful. Harry, smiling, had asked Professor Quirrell what
level he played at, and Professor Quirrell, also smiling, had responded,
One level higher than you.)
“So you were watching this whole time,” said Harry. “Disillusionment, I think it’s called.”
A thin smile. “It would have been foolish of me to take the slightest
risk that you came to harm.”
*

487 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

“And you wanted to see the results of your test ﬁrsthand,” said Harry.
“So. Am I like my father?”
A strange sad expression came over the man, one that looked foreign
to his face. “I should sooner say, Harry Potter, that you resemble—”
Severus stopped short.
He stared at Harry.
“Lestrange called you a son of a mudblood,” Severus said slowly. “It
didn’t seem to bother you much.”
Harry furrowed his eyebrows. “Not under those circumstances, no.”
“You’d just helped him,” Severus said. His eyes were intent on Harry.
“And he threw it back in your face. Surely that isn’t something you’d
just forgive?”
“He’d just been through a pretty harrowing experience,” Harry said.
“And I don’t think being rescued by ﬁrst-years helped his pride much,
either.”
“I suppose it was easy enough to forgive,” Severus said, and his voice
was odd, “since Lestrange means nothing to you. Just some strange
Slytherin. If it was a friend, perhaps, you would have felt far more injured by what he said.”
“If he were a friend,” Harry said, “all the more reason to forgive
him.”
There was a long silence. Harry felt, and he couldn’t have said why
or from where, that the air was ﬁlling up with a dreadful tension, like
water rising, and rising, and rising.
Then Severus smiled, looking suddenly relaxed once more, and all
the tension vanished.
“You are a very forgiving person,” Severus said, still smiling. “I suppose your stepfather, Michael Verres-Evans, was the one who taught it
to you.”
“More like Dad’s science ﬁction and fantasy collection,” said Harry.
“Sort of my ﬁfth parent, really. I’ve lived the lives of all the characters in
all my books, and all their mighty wisdom thunders in my head. Somewhere in there was someone like Lesath, I expect, though I couldn’t say
who. It wasn’t hard to put myself in his shoes. And it was my books
that told me what to do about it, too. The good guys forgive.”
*

488 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

Severus gave a light, amused laugh. “I’m afraid I wouldn’t know
much about what good people do.”
Harry looked at him. That was kind of sad, actually. “I’ll lend you
some novels with good people in them, if you like.”
“I should like to ask your advice about something,” Severus said, his
voice casual. “I know of another ﬁfth-year Slytherin who was being
bullied by Gryﬃndors. He was wooing a beautiful Muggleborn girl,
who came across him being bullied, and tried to rescue him. And he
called her a mudblood, and that was the end for them. He apologized,
many times, but she never forgave him. Have you any thoughts for
what he could have said or done, to win from her the forgiveness you
gave Lestrange?”
“Erm,” Harry said, “based on only that information, I’m not sure
he was the main one who had a problem. I’d have told him not to date
someone that incapable of forgiveness. Suppose they’d gotten married,
can you imagine life in that household?”
There was a pause.
“Oh, but she could forgive,” Severus said with amusement in his
voice. “Why, afterward, she went oﬀ and became the girlfriend of the
bully. Tell me, why would she forgive the bully, and not the bullied?”
Harry shrugged. “At a wild guess, because the bully had hurt someone else very badly, and the bullied had hurt her just a little, and to her
that just felt far more unforgivable somehow. Or, not to put too ﬁne a
point on it, was the bully handsome? Or for that matter, rich?”
There was another pause.
“Yes to both,” said Severus.
“And there you have it,” said Harry. “Not that I’ve ever been through
high school myself, but my books give me to understand that there’s a
certain kind of teenage girl who’ll be outraged by a single insult if the
boy is plain or poor, yet who can somehow ﬁnd room in her heart to
forgive a rich and handsome boy his bullying. She was shallow, in other
words. Tell whoever it was that she wasn’t worthy of him and he needs
to get over it and move on and next time date girls who are deep instead
of pretty.”
Severus stared at Harry in silence, his eyes glittering. The smile had
*

489 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

faded, and though Severus’s face twitched, it did not return.
Harry was starting to feel a bit nervous. “Um, not that I’ve got any
experience in the area myself, obviously, but I think that’s what a wise
adviser from my books would say.”
There was more silence and more glittering.
It was probably a good time to change the subject.
“So,” Harry said. “Did I pass your test, whatever it was?”
“I think,” Severus said, “that there should be no more conversations
between us, Potter, and you would be exceedingly wise never to speak
of this one.”
Harry blinked. “Would you mind telling me what I did wrong?”
“You oﬀended me,” said Severus. “And I no longer trust your cunning.”
Harry stared at Severus, taken rather aback.
“But you have given me well-meant advice,” said Severus Snape, “and
so I will give you true advice in return.” His voice was almost perfectly
steady. Like a string stretched almost perfectly horizontal, despite the
massive weight hanging from its middle, by a million tons of tension
pulling at either end. “You almost died today, Potter. In the future,
never share your wisdom with anyone unless you know exactly what
you are both talking about.”
Harry’s mind ﬁnally made the connection.
“You were that—”
Harry’s mouth snapped shut as the almost died part sank in, two
seconds too late.
“Yes,” said Severus, “I was.”
And the terrible tension ﬂooded back into the room like water pressurized at the bottom of the ocean.
Harry couldn’t breathe.
Lose. Now.
“I didn’t know,” Harry whispered. “I’m s—”
“No,” said Severus. Just that one word.
Harry stood there in silence, his mind frantically searching for options. Severus stood between him and the window, which was a real
pity, because a fall from that height wouldn’t kill a wizard.
*

490 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

“Your books betrayed you, Potter,” said Severus, still in that voice
stretched tight by a million tons of pull. “They did not tell you the one
thing you needed to know. You cannot learn from stories what it is like
to lose the one you love. That is something you could never understand
without feeling it yourself.”
“My father,” Harry whispered. It was his best guess, the one thing
that might save him. “My father tried to protect you from the bullies.”
A ghastly smile stretched across Severus’s face, and the man moved
toward Harry.
And past him.
“Goodbye, Potter,” said Severus, not looking back on his way out.
“We shall have little to say to each other from today on.”
And at the corner, the man stopped, and without turning, spoke one
ﬁnal time.
“Your father was the bully,” said Severus Snape, “and what your
mother saw in him was something I never did understand until this day.”
He left.
Harry turned and walked toward the window. His shaking hands
went onto the ledge.
Never give anyone wise advice unless you know exactly what you’re both
talking about. Got it.
Harry stared out at the clouds and the light drizzle for a while. The
window looked out on the east grounds, and it was afternoon, so if the
sun was visible through the clouds at all, Harry couldn’t see it.
His hands had stopped shaking, but there was a tight feeling in
Harry’s chest, like it was being compressed by metal bands.
So his father had been a bully.
And his mother had been shallow.
Maybe they’d grown up later. Good people like Professor McGonagall did seem to think the world of them, and it might not be only
because they were heroic martyrs.
Of course, that was scant consolation when you were eleven and
about to turn into a teenager, and wondering what sort of teenager you
might become.
So very terrible.
*

491 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

So very sad.
Such an awful life Harry led.
Learning that his genetic parents hadn’t been perfect, why, he ought
to spend awhile moping about that, feeling sorry for himself.
Maybe he could complain to Lesath Lestrange.
Harry had read about Dementors. Cold and darkness surrounded
them, and fear, they sucked away all your happy thoughts and in that
absence all your worst memories rose to the surface.
He could imagine himself in Lesath’s shoes, knowing that his parents
were in Azkaban for life, that place from which no one had ever escaped.
And Lesath would be imagining himself in his mother’s place, in the
cold and the darkness and the fear, alone with all of her worst memories,
even in her dreams, every second of every day.
For an instant Harry imagined his own Mum and Dad in Azkaban with the Dementors sucking out their life, draining away the happy
memories of their love for him. Just for an instant, before his imagination blew a fuse and called an emergency shutdown and told him never
to imagine that again.
Was it right to do that to anyone, even the second most evil person
in the world?
No, said the wisdom of Harry’s books, not if there’s any other way,
any other way at all.
And unless the wizarding justice system was as perfect as their prisons—and that sounded rather improbable, all things considered—somewhere in Azkaban was a person who was entirely innocent, and probably more than one.
There was a burning sensation in Harry’s throat, and moisture gathering in his eyes, and he wanted to teleport all of Azkaban’s prisoners to
safety and call down ﬁre from the sky and blast that terrible place down
to bedrock. But he couldn’t, because he wasn’t God.
And Harry remembered what Professor Quirrell had said beneath
the starlight: Sometimes, when this ﬂawed world seems unusually hateful,
I wonder whether there might be some other place, far away, where I should
have been... But the stars are so very, very far away... And I wonder what I
would dream about, if I slept for a long, long time.
*

492 *

**
*

EMPATH Y

*
*

*

Right now this ﬂawed world seemed unusually hateful.
And Harry couldn’t understand Professor Quirrell’s words, it might
have been an alien that had spoken, or an Artiﬁcial Intelligence, something built along such diﬀerent lines from Harry that his brain couldn’t
be forced to operate in that mode.
You couldn’t leave your home planet while it still contained a place
like Azkaban.
You had to stay and ﬁght.

*

493 *

CHAPTER

TWENT Y-EIGHT

REDUCTIONISM
kay,” Harry said, swallowing. “Okay, Hermione, it’s enough,
you can stop.” The white sugar pill in front of Hermione still
hadn’t changed shape or color at all, even though she was concentrating
harder than Harry had ever seen, her eyes squeezed shut, beads of sweat
on her forehead, hand trembling as it gripped the wand—
“Hermione, stop! It’s not going to work, Hermione, I don’t think
we can make things that don’t exist yet!”
Slowly, Hermione’s hand relaxed its grasp on the wand.
“I thought I felt it,” she said in a bare whisper. “I thought I felt it
start to Transﬁgure, just for a second.”
There was a lump in Harry’s throat. “You were probably imagining
it. Hoping too hard.”
“I probably was,” she said. She looked like she wanted to cry.
Slowly, Harry took his mechanical pencil in his hand, and reached
over to the sheet of paper with all the items crossed out, and drew a line
through the item that said ‘Alzheimer’s cure’.
They couldn’t have fed anyone a Transﬁgured pill. But Transﬁguration, at least the kind they could do, didn’t enchant the targets—it
wouldn’t Transﬁgure a regular broomstick into a ﬂying one. So if Hermione had been able to make a pill at all, it would have been a nonmagical
pill, one that worked for ordinary material reasons. They could have secretly made pills for a Muggle science lab, let them study the pills and
try to reverse-engineer them before the Transﬁguration wore oﬀ... no
one in either world would need to know that magic had been involved,
it would just be another scientiﬁc breakthrough...

“O

*

495 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

It hadn’t been the sort of thing a wizard would think of, either. They
didn’t respect mere patterns of atoms that much, they didn’t think of
unenchanted material things as objects of power. If it wasn’t magical, it
wasn’t interesting.
Earlier, Harry had very secretly—he hadn’t even told Hermione—
tried to Transﬁgure nanotechnology à la Eric Drexler. (He’d tried to
produce a desktop nanofactory, of course, not tiny self-replicating assemblers, Harry wasn’t insane.) It would have been godhood in a single
shot if it’d worked.
“That was it for today, right?” said Hermione. She was slumped back
in her chair, leaning her head against the back; and her face showed her
tiredness, which was very unusual for Hermione. She liked to pretend
she was limitless, at least when Harry was around.
“One more,” Harry said cautiously, “but that one’s small, plus it
might actually work. I saved it for last because I was hoping we could end
on an up note. It’s real stuﬀ, not like lightsabers. They’ve already made
it in the laboratory, not like the Alzheimer’s cure. And it’s a generic substance, not speciﬁc like the lost books you tried to Transﬁgure copies of.
I made a diagram of the molecular structure to show you. We just want
to make it longer than it’s ever been made before, and with all the tubes
aligned, and the endpoints embedded in diamond.” Harry produced a
sheet of graph paper.
Hermione sat back up, took it, and studied it, frowning. “These are
all carbon atoms? And Harry, what’s the name? I can’t Transﬁgure it if
I don’t know what it’s called.”
Harry made a disgusted face. He was still having trouble getting used
to that sort of thing, it shouldn’t matter what something was named
if you knew what it was. “They’re called buckytubes, or carbon nanotubes. It’s a kind of fullerene that was discovered just this year. It’s
about a hundred times stronger than steel and a sixth of the weight.”
Hermione looked up from the graph paper, her face surprised.
“That’s real?”
“Yeah,” Harry said, “just hard to make the Muggle way. If we could
get enough of the stuﬀ, we could use it to build a space elevator all the
way up to geosynchronous orbit or higher, and in terms of delta-v that’s
*

496 *

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

halfway to anywhere in the Solar System. Plus we could throw out solar
power satellites like confetti.”
Hermione was frowning again. “Is this stuﬀ safe?”
“I don’t see why it wouldn’t be,” Harry said. “A buckytube is just a
graphite sheet wrapped into a circular tube, basically, and graphite is the
same stuﬀ used in pencils—”
“I know what graphite is, Harry,” Hermione said. She brushed her
hair back absentmindedly, her eyebrows furrowed as she stared at the
sheet of paper.
Harry reached into a pocket of his robes, and produced a white
thread tied to two small gray plastic rings at either end. He’d added
drops of superglue where the thread met either ring, to make it all a single object that could be Transﬁgured as a whole. Cyanoacrylate, if Harry
remembered correctly, worked by covalent bonds, and that was as close
to being a “solid object” as you ever got in a world ultimately composed
of tiny little individual atoms. “When you’re ready,” Harry said, “try to
Transﬁgure this into a set of aligned buckytube ﬁbers embedded in two
solid diamond rings.”
“All right...” Hermione said slowly. “Harry, I feel like I just missed
something.”
Harry shrugged helplessly. Maybe you’re just tired. He knew better
than to say it out loud, though.
Hermione laid her wand against one plastic ring, and stared for a
while.
Two small circles of glittering diamond lay on the table, connected
by a long black thread.
“It changed,” said Hermione. She sounded like she was trying to be
enthusiastic but had run out of energy. “Now what?”
Harry felt a bit deﬂated by his research partner’s lack of passion,
but did his best not to show it; maybe the same process would work in
reverse to cheer her up. “Now I test it to see if it holds weight.”
There was an A-frame Harry had rigged up to do an earlier experiment with diamond rods—you could make solid diamond objects easily,
using Transﬁguration, they just wouldn’t last. The earlier experiment
had measured whether Transﬁguring a long diamond rod into a shorter
*

497 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

diamond rod would allow it to lift a suspended heavy weight as it contracted, i.e., could you Transﬁgure against tension, which you in fact
could.
Harry carefully looped one circle of glittering diamond over the
thick metal hook at the top of the rig, then attached a thick metal hanger
to the bottom ring, and then started attaching weights to the hanger.
(Harry had asked the Weasley twins to Transﬁgure the apparatus for
him, and the Weasley twins had given him an incredulous look, like they
couldn’t ﬁgure out what sort of prank he could possibly want that for, but
they hadn’t asked any questions. And their Transﬁgurations, according
to them, lasted for around three hours, so Harry and Hermione had a
while left yet.)
“One hundred kilograms,” Harry said about a minute later. “I don’t
think a steel thread this thin would hold that. It should go up much
higher, but that’s all the weight I’ve got.”
There was a further silence.
Harry straightened up, and went back to their table, and sat down in
his chair, and ceremoniously made a check mark next to ‘Buckytubes’.
“There,” Harry said. “That one worked.”
“But it’s not really useful, Harry, is it?” Hermione said from where
she was sitting with her head resting in her hands. “I mean, even if we
gave it to a scientist they couldn’t learn how to make lots of buckytubes
from studying ours.”
“They might be able to learn something,” Harry said. “Hermione,
look at it, that little tiny thread holding up all that weight, we just made
something that no Muggle laboratory could make—”
“But any other witch could make it,” Hermione said. Her exhaustion
was coming into her voice, now. “Harry, I don’t think this is working
out.”
“You mean our relationship?” Harry said. “Great! Let’s break up.”
That got a slight grin out of her. “I mean our research.”
“Oh, Hermione, how could you?”
“You’re sweet when you’re mean,” she said. “But Harry, this is nuts,
I’m twelve, you’re eleven, it’s silly to think we’re going to discover anything that no one’s ever ﬁgured out before.”
*

498 *

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

“Are you really saying we should give up on unraveling the secrets
of magic after trying for less than one month?” Harry said, trying to
put a note of challenge into his voice. Honestly he was feeling some
of the same fatigue as Hermione. None of the good ideas ever worked.
He’d made just one discovery worth mentioning, the Mendelian pattern,
and he couldn’t tell Hermione about it without breaking his promise to
Draco.
“No,” Hermione said. Her young face was looking very serious and
adult. “I’m saying right now we should be studying all the magic that
wizards already know, so we can do this sort of thing after we graduate
from Hogwarts.”
“Um...” Harry said. “Hermione, I hate to put it this way, but imagine
we’d decided to hold oﬀ on research until later, and the ﬁrst thing we
tried after we graduated was Transﬁguring an Alzheimer’s cure, and it
worked. We’d feel... I don’t think the word stupid would adequately
describe how we’d feel. What if there’s something else like that and it
does work?”
“That’s not fair, Harry!” Hermione said. Her voice was trembling
like she was on the verge of breaking out crying. “You can’t put that on
people! It’s not our job to do that sort of thing, we’re kids!”
For a moment Harry wondered what would happen if someone told
Hermione she had to ﬁght an immortal Dark Lord, if she would turn
into one of the whiny self-pitying heroes that Harry could never stand
reading about in his books.
“Anyway,” Hermione said. Her voice shook. “I don’t want to keep
doing this. I don’t believe children can do things that grownups can’t,
that’s only in stories.”
There was silence in the classroom.
Hermione started to look a little scared, and Harry knew that his
own expression had gotten colder.
It might not have hurt so much if the same thought hadn’t already
come to Harry—that, while thirty might be old for a scientiﬁc revolutionary and twenty about right, while there were people who got doctorates when they were seventeen and fourteen-year-old heirs who’d been
great kings or generals, there wasn’t really anyone who’d made the his*

499 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

tory books at eleven.
“All right,” Harry said. “Figure out how to do something a grownup
can’t. Is that your challenge?”
“I didn’t mean it like that,” Hermione said, her voice coming out in
a frightened whisper.
With an eﬀort, Harry wrenched his gaze away from Hermione. “I’m
not angry at you,” Harry said. His voice was cold, despite his best eﬀorts.
“I’m angry at, I don’t know, everything. But I’m not willing to lose,
Hermione. Losing isn’t always the right thing to do. I’ll ﬁgure out how
to do something a grown wizard can’t do, and then I’ll get back to you.
How’s that?”
There was more silence.
“Okay,” said Hermione, her voice wavering a little. She pushed herself up out of her chair, and went over to the door of the abandoned
classroom they’d been working in. Her hand went onto the doorknob.
“We’re still friends, right? And if you can’t ﬁgure out anything—”
Her voice halted.
“Then we’ll study together,” Harry said. His voice was even colder
now.
“Um, bye for now, then,” Hermione said, and she quickly went out
of the room and shut the door behind her.
Sometimes Harry hated having a dark side, even when he was inside
it.
And the part of him that had thought exactly the same thing as Hermione, that no, children couldn’t do what grownups couldn’t, was saying
all the things that Hermione had been too frightened to say, like, That’s
one hell of a diﬃcult challenge you just grabbed for yourself and boy are you
going to end up with egg on your face this time and at least this way you’ll
know you’ve failed.
And the part of him that didn’t enjoy losing replied, in a very cold
voice, Fine, you can shut up and watch.

**
*
*

500 *

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

It was almost lunchtime, and Harry didn’t care. He hadn’t even bothered
grabbing a snack bar from his pouch. His stomach could stand a little
starving.
The wizarding world was tiny, they didn’t think like scientists, they
didn’t know science, they didn’t question what they’d grown up with,
they hadn’t put protective shells on their time machines, they played
Quidditch, all of magical Britain was smaller than a small Muggle city,
the greatest wizarding school only educated up to the age of seventeen,
silly wasn’t challenging that at eleven, silly was assuming wizards knew
what they were doing and had already exhausted all the low-hanging
fruit a scientiﬁc polymath would see.
Step One had been to make a list of every magical constraint Harry
could remember, all the things you supposedly couldn’t do.
Step Two, mark the constraints that seemed to make the least sense
from a scientiﬁc perspective.
Step Three, prioritize constraints that a wizard would be unlikely to
question if they didn’t know science.
Step Four, come up with avenues for attacking them.

**
*
Hermione still felt a little shaky as she sat down next to Mandy at the
Ravenclaw table. Hermione’s lunch had two fruits (tomato slices and
peeled tangerines), three vegetables (carrots, carrots, and more carrots),
one meat (fried Diricawl drumsticks whose unhealthy coating she would
carefully remove), and one little piece of chocolate cake that she would
earn by eating the other parts.
It hadn’t been as bad as Potions class, sometimes she still had nightmares about that. But this time she had made it happen and she’d felt like
its target. Just for a moment, before the terrible cold darkness looked
away and said it wasn’t angry with her, because it hadn’t wanted to scare
her.
And she still had that feeling like she’d missed something earlier,
something really important.
*

501 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

But they hadn’t violated any of the rules of Transﬁguration... had
they? They hadn’t made any liquids, any gases, they hadn’t taken orders
from the Defense Professor...
The pill! That had been something to be eaten!
...well, no, nobody would just eat a pill lying around, it hadn’t
worked actually, they could have just Finite Incantatemed it if it had,
but she would still have to tell Harry about that and make sure they
didn’t mention it in front of Professor McGonagall, in case they were
never allowed to study Transﬁguration again...
Hermione was starting to get a really sick feeling in her stomach. She
pushed back her plate from the table, she couldn’t eat lunch like this.
And she closed her eyes and began to mentally recite the rules of
Transﬁguration.
“I will never Transﬁgure anything into liquid or gas.”
“I will never Transﬁgure anything that looks like food or anything else
that goes inside a human body.”
No, they really shouldn’t have tried to Transﬁgure the pill, or they
should’ve at least realized... she’d been so caught up in Harry’s brilliant
idea that she hadn’t thought...
The sick feeling in Hermione’s stomach was getting worse. There
was a feeling in her mind of something hovering just on the edge of
recognition, a perception about to invert itself, a young woman about
to become a crone, a vase about to become two faces...
And she went on remembering the rules of Transﬁguration.

**
*
Harry’s knuckles had gone white on his wand by the time he stopped
trying to Transﬁgure the air in front of his wand into a paperclip. It
wouldn’t have been safe to Transﬁgure the paperclip into gas, of course,
but Harry didn’t see any reason why it would be unsafe the other way
around. It just wasn’t supposed to be possible. But why not? Air was as
real a substance as anything else...
*

502 *

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

Well, maybe that limitation did make sense. Air was disorganized, all
the molecules constantly changing their relation to each other. Maybe
you couldn’t impose a new form on substance unless the substance was
staying still long enough for you to master it, even though the atoms in
solids were also constantly vibrating all the time...
The more Harry failed, the colder he felt, the clearer everything
seemed to become.
All right. Next on the list.
You could only Transﬁgure whole objects as wholes. You couldn’t
Transﬁgure half a match into a needle, you had to Transﬁgure the whole
thing. Back when Harry had been trapped in that classroom by Draco, it
had been the reason he couldn’t just Transﬁgure a thin cylindrical crosssection of the walls into sponge, and punch out a chunk of stone large
enough for him to ﬁt through the hole. He would have needed to impose
a new form on the whole wall, and maybe a whole section of Hogwarts,
just in order to change that little cross-section.
And that was ridiculous.
Things were made of atoms. Lots of little tiny dots. There was no
contiguity, there was no solidity, just electromagnetic forces holding the
little dots related to each other...

**
*
Mandy Brocklehurst paused with her fork on her way to her mouth.
“Huh,” she said to Su Li, sitting across from the now-empty space beside
her, “what got into Hermione?”

**
*
Harry wanted to kill his eraser.
He’d been trying to change a single spot on the pink rectangle into
steel, apart from the rest of the rubber, and the eraser wasn’t cooperating.
It had to be a conceptual limitation, not a real one. Had to be.
*

503 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Things were made of atoms, and every atom was a tiny separate thing.
Atoms were held together by a quantum mist of shared electrons, for
covalent bonds, or sometimes just magnetism at close ranges, for ionic
bonds or van der Waals forces.
If it came down to that, the protons and neutrons inside the nuclei
were tiny separate things. The quarks inside the protons and neutrons
were tiny separate things! There simply wasn’t anything in reality, the
world-out-there, that corresponded to people’s conceit of solid objects.
It was all just little dots.
And free Transﬁguration was all in the mind to begin with, wasn’t
it? No words, no gestures. Only the pure concept of form, kept strictly
separate from substance, imposed on the substance, conceived of apart
from its form. That and the wand and whatever made you a wizard.
The wizards couldn’t transform parts of things, could only transform
what their minds perceived as wholes, because they didn’t know in their
bones that it was all just atoms deep down.
Harry had focused on that knowledge as hard as he could, the true
fact that the eraser was just a collection of atoms, everything was just
collections of atoms, and the atoms of the little patch he was trying to
Transﬁgure formed just as valid a collection as any other collection he
cared to think about.
And Harry still hadn’t been able to change that single part of the
eraser, the Transﬁguration wasn’t going anywhere.
This. Was. Ridiculous.
Harry’s knuckles were whitening on his wand again. He was sick of
getting experimental results that didn’t make sense.
Maybe the fact that some part of his mind was still thinking in terms
of objects was stopping the Transﬁguration from going through. He had
thought of a collection of atoms that was an eraser. He had thought of a
collection that was a little patch.
Time to kick it up a notch.
Harry pressed his wand harder against that tiny section of eraser, and
tried to see through the illusion that nonscientists thought was reality,
the world of desks and chairs, air and erasers and people.
When you walked through a park, the immersive world that sur*

504 *

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

rounded you was something that existed inside your own brain as a pattern of neurons ﬁring. The sensation of a bright blue sky wasn’t something high above you, it was something in your visual cortex, and your
visual cortex was in the back of your brain. All the sensations of that
bright world were really happening in that quiet cave of bone you called
your skull, the place where you lived and never, ever left. If you really
wanted to say hello to someone, to the actual person, you wouldn’t shake
their hand, you’d knock gently on their skull and say “How are you doing in there?” That was what people were, that was where they really
lived. And the picture of the park that you thought you were walking
through was something that was visualized inside your brain as it processed the signals sent down from your eyes and retina.
It wasn’t a lie like the Buddhists thought, there wasn’t something terribly mystical and unexpected behind the veil of Maya, what lay beyond
the illusion of the park was just the actual park, but it was all still illusion.
Harry wasn’t sitting inside the classroom.
He wasn’t looking at the eraser.
Harry was inside Harry’s skull.
He was experiencing a processed picture his brain had decoded from
the signals sent down by his retina.
The real eraser was somewhere else, somewhere that wasn’t the picture.
And the real eraser wasn’t like the picture Harry’s brain had of it.
The idea of the eraser as a solid object was something that existed only
inside his own brain, inside the parietal cortex that processed his sense
of shape and space. The real eraser was a collection of atoms held together by electromagnetic forces and shared covalent electrons, while
nearby, air molecules bounced oﬀ each other and bounced oﬀ the erasermolecules.
The real eraser was far away, and Harry, inside his skull, could never
quite touch it, could only imagine ideas about it. But his wand had the
power, it could change things out there in reality, it was only Harry’s
own preconceptions that were limiting it. Somewhere beyond the veil
of Maya, the truth behind Harry’s concept of “my wand” was touching
the collection of atoms that Harry’s mind thought of as “a patch on
*

505 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

the eraser”, and if that wand could change the collection of atoms that
Harry considered “the whole eraser”, there was absolutely no reason
why it couldn’t change the other collection too...
The Transﬁguration still wasn’t going through.
Harry’s teeth clenched together, and he kicked it up another notch.
The concept Harry’s mind had of the eraser as a single object was
obvious nonsense.
It was a map that didn’t and couldn’t match the territory.
Human beings modeled the world using stratiﬁed levels of organization, they had separate thoughts about how countries worked, how people
worked, how organs worked, how cells worked, how molecules worked,
how quarks worked.
When Harry’s brain needed to think about the eraser, it would think
about the rules that governed erasers, like “erasers can get rid of pencilmarks”. Only if Harry’s brain needed to predict what would happen on
the lower chemical level, only then would Harry’s brain start thinking—
as though it were a separate fact—about rubber molecules.
But that was all in the mind.
Harry’s mind might have separate beliefs about rules that governed
erasers, but there was no separate law of physics that governed erasers.
Harry’s mind modeled reality using multiple levels of organization,
with diﬀerent beliefs about each level. But that was all in the map, the
true territory wasn’t like that, reality itself had only a single level of organization, the quarks, it was a uniﬁed low-level process obeying mathematically simple rules.
Or at least that was what Harry had believed before he’d found out
about magic, but the eraser wasn’t magical.
And even if the eraser had been magical, the idea that there could
really exist a single solid eraser was impossible. Things like erasers couldn’t
be basic elements of reality, they were too big and complicated to be
atoms, they had to be made of parts. You couldn’t have things that were
fundamentally complicated. The implicit belief that Harry’s brain had
in the eraser as a single object wasn’t just wrong, it was a map-territory
confusion, the eraser only existed as a separate concept in Harry’s multilevel model of the world, not as a separate element of single-level reality.
*

506 *

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

...the Transﬁguration still wasn’t happening.
Harry was breathing heavily, failed Transﬁguration was almost as
tiring as successful Transﬁguration, but damned if he’d give up now.
All right, screw this nineteenth-century garbage.
Reality wasn’t atoms, it wasn’t a set of tiny billiard balls bopping
around. That was just another lie. The notion of atoms as little dots
was just another convenient hallucination that people clung to because
they didn’t want to confront the inhumanly alien shape of the underlying reality. No wonder, then, that his attempts to Transﬁgure based
on that hadn’t worked. If he wanted power, he had to abandon his humanity, and force his thoughts to conform to the true math of quantum
mechanics.
There were no particles, there were just clouds of amplitude in a multiparticle conﬁguration space and what his brain fondly imagined to be an
eraser was nothing except a gigantic factor in a wavefunction that happened to factorize, it didn’t have a separate existence any more than there
was a particular solid factor of 3 hidden inside the number 6, if his wand
was capable of altering factors in an approximately factorizable wavefunction then it should damn well be able to alter the slightly smaller factor
that Harry’s brain visualized as a patch of material on the eraser—

**
*
Hermione tore through the hallways, shoes pounding hard on the stone,
breath coming in pants, the shock of adrenaline still racing through her
blood.
Like a picture of a young woman turning into an old crone, like the
cup becoming two faces.
What had they been doing?
What had they been doing?
She came to the classroom and her ﬁngers slipped on the doorknob
at ﬁrst, too sweaty, she grabbed harder and the door opened—
—in a single ﬂash of perception she saw Harry staring at a small pink
rectangle on the table in front of him—
*

507 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

—as a few paces away the tiny black thread, almost invisible from
this distance, supported all that weight—
“Harry get out of the classroom!”
Pure shock crossed Harry’s face, and he stood up so fast he almost
fell over, stopping only to grab the small pink rectangle from the table,
and he tore out of the door, she’d already stepped aside, her wand was
already in her hand coming up pointing at the thread—
“Finite Incantatem!”
And Hermione slammed the door shut again, just as the gigantic
crash of a hundred kilograms of falling metal came from inside.
She was panting, gasping for air, she’d run all the way here without
stopping, she was soaked in sweat and her legs and thighs burned like
living ﬂames, she couldn’t have answered Harry’s questions for all the
Galleons in the world.
Hermione blinked, and realized that she had started to fall, and
Harry had caught her, and was lowering her gently to sit on the ﬂoor.
“...healthy...” she managed to whisper.
“What?” said Harry, looking paler than she’d ever seen him.
“...are you, feeling, healthy...”
Harry started looking even more frightened as the question sank in.
“I, I don’t think I have any symptoms—”
Hermione closed her eyes for a moment. “Good,” she whispered.
“Catch, breath.”
That took a while. Harry was still looking scared. That was good
too, maybe it would teach him a lesson.
Hermione reached into the pouch Harry had bought her, whispered
“water” through her parched throat, took out the bottle and drank in
great huge gulps.
And then it was still a while before she could talk again.
“We broke the rules, Harry,” she said in a hoarse voice. “We broke
the rules.”
“I...” Harry swallowed. “I still don’t see how, I’ve been thinking
but—”
“I asked if the Transﬁguration was safe and you answered me!”
There was a pause.
*

508 *

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

“That’s it?” Harry said.
She could have screamed.
“Harry, don’t you get it?” she said. “It’s made out of tiny ﬁbers, what
if it unraveled, who knows what could go wrong, we didn’t ask Professor
McGonagall! Don’t you see what we were doing? We were experimenting with Transﬁguration. We were experimenting with Transﬁguration!”
There was another pause.
“Right...” Harry said slowly. “That’s probably one of those things
they don’t even bother telling you not to do because it’s too obvious.
Don’t test brilliant new ideas for Transﬁguration by yourselves in an
unused classroom without consulting any professors.”
“You could have gotten us killed, Harry!” Hermione knew it wasn’t
fair, she’d made the mistake too, but she still felt angry at him, he always
sounded so conﬁdent and that had dragged her unthinkingly along in his
wake. “We could have spoiled Professor McGonagall’s perfect record!”
“Yes,” said Harry, “let’s not tell her about this, shall we?”
“We have to stop,” Hermione said. “We have to stop this or we’re
going to get hurt. We’re too young, Harry, we can’t do this, not yet.”
A weak grin crossed Harry’s face. “Um, you’re sort of wrong about
that.”
And he held out a small pink rectangle, a rubber eraser with a bright
metal patch on it.
Hermione stared at it, puzzled.
“Quantum mechanics wasn’t enough,” Harry said. “I had to go all
the way down to timeless physics before it took. Had to see the wand as
enforcing a relation between separate past and future realities, instead of
changing anything over time—but I did it, Hermione, I saw past the illusion of objects, and I bet there’s not a single other wizard in the world
who could have. Even if some Muggleborn knew about timeless formulations of quantum mechanics, it would just be a weird belief about
strange distant quantum stuﬀ, they wouldn’t see that it was reality, accept that the world they knew was just a hallucination. I Transﬁgured
part of the eraser without changing the whole thing.”
Hermione raised her wand again, pointed it at the eraser.
For a moment anger crossed Harry’s face, but he didn’t make any
*

509 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

move to stop her.
“Finite Incantatem,” said Hermione. “Check with Professor McGonagall before you try it again.”
Harry nodded, though his face was still a bit tight.
“And we still have to stop,” said Hermione.
“Why?” said Harry. “Don’t you see what this means, Hermione?
Wizards don’t know everything! There’s too few of them, even fewer
who know any science, they haven’t exhausted the low-hanging fruit—”
“It’s not safe,” Hermione said. “If we can ﬁnd out new things it’s
even less safe! We’re too young! We made one big mistake already, next
time we could just die!”
Then Hermione ﬂinched.
Harry looked away from her, and started taking slow, deep breaths.
“Please don’t try to do it alone, Harry,” Hermione said, her voice
trembling. “Please.”
Please don’t make me have to decide whether to tell Professor Flitwick.
There was a long pause.
“So you want us to study,” Harry said. She could tell he was trying
to keep the anger out of his voice. “Just study.”
Hermione wasn’t sure if she should say anything, but... “Like you
studied, um, timeless physics, right?”
Harry looked back at her.
“That thing you did,” Hermione said, her voice tentative, “it wasn’t
because of our experiments, right? You could do it because you’d read
lots of books.”
Harry opened his mouth, and then he shut it again. There was a
frustrated look on his face.
“All right,” Harry said. “How about this. We study, and if I think
of anything that seems really worth trying, we’ll try it after I ask a professor.”
“Okay,” Hermione said. She didn’t fall over with relief, but only
because she was already sitting down.
“Shall we get lunch?” Harry said cautiously.
Hermione nodded. Yes. Lunch sounded good. For real, this time.
She carefully began to push herself oﬀ the stone ﬂoor, wincing as her
*

510

*

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

body screamed at her—
Harry pointed his wand at her and said “Wingardium Leviosa.”
Hermione blinked as the huge weight on her legs diminished to
something bearable.
A smile quirked across Harry’s face. “You can lift something without being able to Hover it completely,” he said. “Remember that experiment?”
Hermione smiled back helplessly, although she thought she ought to
still be angry.
And she started walking back toward the Great Hall, feeling remarkably and wonderfully light on her feet, as Harry carefully kept his wand
trained on her.
He only managed to keep it up for ﬁve minutes, but it was the
thought that counted.

**
*
Minerva looked at Dumbledore.
Dumbledore gazed back inquiringly at her. “Did you understand any
of that?” the Headmaster said, sounding bemused.
It had been the most complete and utter gibberish that Minerva could
ever remember hearing. She was feeling a bit embarrassed about having
summoned the Headmaster to hear it, but she’d been given explicit instructions.
“I’m afraid not,” Professor McGonagall said primly.
“So,” Dumbledore said. The silver beard swung away from her, the
old wizard’s twinkling gaze looked elsewhere once more. “You suspect
you might be able to do something that other wizards can’t do, something we think is impossible.”
The three of them stood within the Headmaster’s private Transﬁguration workroom, where the shining phoenix of Dumbledore’s Patronus had told her to bring Harry, moments after her own Patronus
had reached him. Light shone down through the skylights and illuminated the great seven-pointed alchemical diagram drawn in the center
of the circular room, showing it to be a little dusty, which saddened
*

511

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Minerva. Transﬁguration research was one of Dumbledore’s great enjoyments, and she’d known how pressed for time he’d been lately, but
not that he was this pressed.
And now Harry Potter was going to waste even more of the Headmaster’s time. But she certainly couldn’t blame Harry for that. He’d
done the proper thing in coming to her to say that he’d had an idea
for doing something in Transﬁguration that was currently believed to
be impossible, and she herself had done exactly what she’d been told to
do: she’d ordered Harry to be quiet and not discuss anything with her
until she had consulted the Headmaster and they’d ﬁnished moving to a
secure location.
If Harry had started out by saying what speciﬁcally he thought he
could do, she wouldn’t have bothered.
“Look, I know it’s hard to explain,” Harry said, sounding a little
embarrassed. “What it adds up to is that what you believe conﬂicts with
what scientists believe, in a case where I’d genuinely expect scientists to
know more than wizards.”
Minerva would have sighed out loud, if Dumbledore hadn’t seemed
to be taking the whole thing very seriously.
Harry’s idea stemmed from simple ignorance, nothing more. If you
changed half of a metal ball into glass, the whole ball had a diﬀerent Form.
To change the part was to change the whole, and that meant removing
the whole Form and replacing it with a diﬀerent one. What would it
even mean to Transﬁgure only half of a metal ball? That the metal ball
as a whole had the same Form as before, but half that ball now had a
diﬀerent Form?
“Mr. Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, “what you want to do isn’t
just impossible, it’s illogical. If you change half of something, you did
change the whole.”
“Indeed,” said Dumbledore. “But Harry is the hero, so he may be
able to do things that are logically impossible.”
Minerva would have rolled her eyes, if she hadn’t gone numb a long
time ago.
“Supposing it was possible,” said Dumbledore, “can you think of any
reason why the results would diﬀer in any way from ordinary Transﬁg*

512

*

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

uration?”
Minerva frowned. The fact that the concept was literally unimaginable was presenting her with some diﬃculty, but she tried to take it at
face value. A Transﬁguration imposed on only half of a metal ball...
“Strange things happening at the interface?” said Minerva. “But that
should be no diﬀerent than Transﬁguring the object as a whole, into a
Form with two diﬀerent parts...”
Dumbledore nodded. “That is my own thought as well. And Harry,
if your theory is correct, it implies that what you want to do is exactly
like any other Transﬁguration, only applied to a part of the subject rather
than the whole? No changes at all?”
“Yes,” Harry said ﬁrmly. “That’s the whole point.”
Dumbledore looked at her again. “Minerva, can you think of any
reason whatsoever why that would be dangerous?”
“No,” said Minerva, after she had ﬁnished searching through her
memory.
“Likewise myself,” said the Headmaster. “All right, then, since this
ought to be exactly analogous to ordinary Transﬁguration in all respects,
and since we cannot think of any reason whatsoever why it would be
dangerous, I think that the second degree of caution will suﬃce.”
Minerva was surprised, but she didn’t object. Dumbledore was by
far her senior in Transﬁguration, and he had tried literally thousands of
new Transﬁgurations without ever choosing a degree of caution that was
too low. He had used Transﬁguration in combat and he was still alive. If
the Headmaster thought the second degree was enough, it was enough.
That Harry was certainly going to fail was, of course, completely
irrelevant.
The two of them started setting up the wards and detection webs.
The most important web was the one that checked to make sure no
Transﬁgured material had entered the air. Harry would be enclosed in a
separate shell of force with its own air supply just to be certain, only his
wand allowed to leave the shield, and the interface tight. They were inside Hogwarts so they couldn’t automatically Apparate out any material
that showed signs of spontaneous combustion, but they could launch it
out a skylight almost as fast, the windows all folded outward for exactly
*

513

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

that reason. Harry himself would go out a diﬀerent skylight at the ﬁrst
sign of trouble.
Harry watched them working, his face looking a little frightened.
“Don’t worry,” said Professor McGonagall in the middle of her running description, “this almost certainly won’t be necessary, Mr. Potter.
If we expected anything to go wrong you would not be allowed to try.
It’s just ordinary precautions for any Transﬁguration no one has ever
tried before.”
Harry swallowed and nodded.
And a few minutes later, Harry was strapped into the safety chair
and resting his wand against a metal ball—one that, based on his current
test scores, should have been too large for him to Transﬁgure in less than
thirty minutes.
And a few minutes after that, Minerva was leaning against the wall,
feeling faint.
There was a small patch of glass on the ball where Harry’s wand had
rested.
Harry didn’t say I told you so, but the smug look on his sweating face
said it for him.
Dumbledore was casting analytic Charms on the ball, looking more
and more intrigued by the moment. Thirty years had melted oﬀ his face.
“Fascinating,” said Dumbledore. “It’s exactly as he claimed. He simply Transﬁgured a part of the subject without Transﬁguring the whole.
You say it’s really just a conceptual limitation, Harry?”
“Yes,” Harry said, “but a deep one, just knowing it had to be a conceptual limitation wasn’t enough. I had to suppress the part of my mind
that was making the error and think instead about the underlying reality
that scientists ﬁgured out.”
“Truly fascinating,” Dumbledore said. “I take it that for any other
wizard to do the same would require months of study if they could do it
at all? And may I ask you to partially Transﬁgure some other subjects?”
“Probably yes and of course,” Harry said.
Half an hour later, Minerva was feeling equally bewildered, but considerably reassured about the safety issues.
It was the same, aside from being logically impossible.
*

514

*

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

“I believe that’s enough, Headmaster,” Minerva said ﬁnally. “I suspect partial Transﬁguration is more tiring than the ordinary sort.”
“Getting less so with practice,” said the exhausted and pale boy, voice
unsteady, “but yeah, you’ve got that right.”
The process of extracting Harry from the wards took another
minute, and then Minerva escorted him to a much more comfortable
chair, and Dumbledore produced an ice-cream soda.
“Congratulations, Mr. Potter!” said Professor McGonagall, and meant
it. She would have bet almost anything against that working.
“Congratulations indeed,” said Dumbledore. “Even I did not make
any original discoveries in Transﬁguration before the age of fourteen.
Not since the day of Dorotea Senjak has any genius ﬂowered so early.”
“Thanks,” Harry said, sounding a little surprised.
“Nonetheless,” Dumbledore said thoughtfully, “I think it would be
most wise to keep this happy event a secret, at least for now. Harry,
did you discuss your idea with any other person before you spoke to
Professor McGonagall?”
There was silence.
“Um...” Harry said. “I don’t want to turn anyone over to the Inquisition, but I did tell one other student—”
The word almost exploded from Professor McGonagall’s lips.
“What? You discussed a completely novel form of Transﬁguration with
a student before consulting a recognized authority? Do you have any
idea how irresponsible that was?”
“I’m sorry,” said Harry. “I didn’t realize.”
The boy looked appropriately frightened, and Minerva felt something inside her relax. At least Harry understood how foolish he’d been.
“You must swear Miss Granger to secrecy,” Dumbledore said gravely.
“And do not tell anyone else unless there is an extremely good reason for
it, and they too have sworn.”
“Ah... why?” Harry said.
Minerva was wondering the same thing. Once again the Headmaster
was thinking too far ahead for her to keep up.
“Because you can do something that no one else will believe you
can do,” Dumbledore said. “Something completely unexpected. It may
*

515

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

prove to be your critical advantage, Harry, and we must preserve it.
Please, trust me in this.”
Professor McGonagall nodded, her ﬁrm face showing nothing of her
inner confusion. “Please do, Mr. Potter,” she said.
“All right...” Harry said slowly.
“Once we have ﬁnished examining your materials,” Dumbledore
added, “you may practice partial Transﬁguration, on glass to steel and
steel to glass only, with Miss Granger to act as your spotter. Naturally,
if either of you suspect any symptom of any form of Transﬁguration
sickness, inform a professor at once.”
Just before Harry left the workroom, with his hand on the doorhandle, the boy turned back and said, “As long as we’re here, have either of
you noticed anything diﬀerent about Professor Snape?”
“Diﬀerent?” said the Headmaster.
Minerva didn’t let her wry smile show on her face. Of course the
boy was apprehensive about the ‘evil Potions Master’, since he had no
way of knowing why Severus was to be trusted. It would have been odd
to say the least, explaining to Harry that Severus was still in love with
his mother.
“I mean, has his behavior changed recently in any way?” said Harry.
“Not that I have seen...” the Headmaster said slowly. “Why do you
ask?”
Harry shook his head. “I don’t want to prejudice your own observations by saying. Just keep an eye out, maybe?”
That sent a quiver of unease through Minerva in a way that no outright accusation of Severus could have.
Harry bowed to both of them respectfully, and took his leave.

**
*
“Albus,” Minerva said after the boy had gone, “how did you know to take
Harry seriously? I would have thought his idea merely impossible!”
*

516

*

**
*

REDUCTIONISM

*
*

*

The old wizard’s face turned grave. “The same reason it must be kept
secret, Minerva. The same reason I told you to come to me, if Harry
made any such claim. Because it is a power that Voldemort knows not.”
The words took a few seconds to sink in.
And then the cold shiver went down her spine, as it always did when
she remembered.
It had started out as an ordinary job interview, Sybill Trelawney applying for the position of Professor of Divination.

The one with the power to vanquish the Dark Lord approaches,
Born to those who have thrice defied him,
Born as the seventh month dies,
And the Dark Lord will mark him as his equal,
But he will have power the Dark Lord knows not,
And either must destroy all but a remnant of the other,
For those two different spirits cannot exist in the same world.

Those dreadful words, spoken in that terrible booming voice, didn’t
seem to ﬁt something like partial Transﬁguration.
“Perhaps not, then,” Dumbledore said after Minerva tried to explain.
“I confess I had been hoping for something that would help in ﬁnding
Voldemort’s horcrux, wherever he may have hidden it. But...” The old
wizard shrugged. “Prophecies are tricky things, Minerva, and it is best
to take no chances. The smallest thing may prove decisive if it remains
unexpected.”
“And what do you suppose he meant about Severus?” said Minerva.
“There I have no idea,” sighed Dumbledore. “Unless Harry is making a move against Severus, and thought that an open question might be
taken seriously where a direct allegation would be dismissed. And if that
was indeed what happened, Harry correctly reasoned that I would not
trust that it was so. Let us simply keep watch, without prejudice, as he
asks.”

*

517

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Aftermath, 1:
“Um, Hermione?” Harry said in a very small voice. “I think I owe
you a really, really, really big apology.”
Aftermath, 2:
Alissa Cornfoot’s eyes were slightly glazed as she gazed upon the Potions Master giving her class a stern lecture, holding up a tiny bronze
bean and saying something about screaming puddles of human ﬂesh.
Ever since the start of this year she’d been having trouble listening in
Potions. She kept staring at their awful, mean, greasy professor and fantasizing about special detentions. There was probably something really
wrong with her but she just couldn’t seem to stop doing it—
“Ow!” Alissa said then.
Snape had just ﬂicked the bronze bean unerringly at Alissa’s forehead.
“Miss Cornfoot,” said the Potions Master, his voice cutting, “this is
a delicate potion and if you cannot pay attention you will hurt your
classmates, not just yourself. See me after class.”
The last four words didn’t help her any, but she tried harder, and
managed to get through the day without melting anyone.
After class, Alissa approached the desk. Part of her wanted to stand
there meekly with her face abashed and her hands clasped penitently
behind her back, just in case, but some quiet instinct told her this might
be a bad idea. So instead she just stood there with her face neutral, in a
posture that was very proper for a young lady, and said, “Professor?”
“Miss Cornfoot,” Snape said without looking up from the sheets he
was grading, “I do not return your aﬀections, I begin to ﬁnd your stares
disturbing, and you will restrain your eyes henceforth. Is that quite
clear?”
“Yes,” said Alissa in a strangled squeak, and Snape dismissed her, and
she ﬂed the classroom with her cheeks ﬂaming like molten lava.

*

518

*

CHAPTER

TWENT Y-NINE

EGOCENTRIC BIA S
here’d been a sinking feeling in Hermione’s stomach lately, every
time she heard the other students talking about her and Harry.
She’d been in a shower stall this morning when she’d overheard a conversation between Morag and Padma that had been the last straw piled
on top of quite a lot of other straws.
She was starting to think that getting involved in a rivalry with Harry
Potter had been a terrible mistake.
If she’d just stayed away from Harry Potter, she could have been Hermione Granger, the brightest academic star of Hogwarts, who was earning more points for Ravenclaw than anyone. She wouldn’t have been
as famous as the Boy-Who-Lived, but she would have been famous for
herself.
Instead the Boy-Who-Lived had an academic rival, and her name happened to be Hermione Granger.
And worse, she had gone on a date with him.
The idea of getting into a Romance with Harry had seemed like an
appealing idea at ﬁrst. She’d read books like that, and if there was anyone
in Hogwarts who was a candidate for the heroine’s love interest it was
obviously Harry Potter. Bright, funny, famous, sometimes scary...
So she’d forced Harry into going on a date with her.
And now she was his love interest.
Or worse, one of the options on his dinner menu.
She’d been in a shower stall that morning and just about to turn
on the water, when she’d heard giggles coming from outside. And she’d
heard Morag talking about how that Muggleborn girl probably wouldn’t

T

*

519

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

ﬁght hard enough to win against Ginevra Weasley, and Padma speculating that Harry Potter might decide he wanted both.
It was like they didn’t understand that girls had options on their
dinner menu and boys fought over them.
But that wasn’t even the part that hurt, really. It was that when she
scored 98 on one of Professor McGonagall’s tests, the news wasn’t that
Hermione Granger had scored the highest in the class, the news was that
Harry Potter’s rival had scored seven more points than him.
If you got too close to the Boy-Who-Lived, you became part of his
story.
You didn’t get your own.
And the thought had come to Hermione that she should just walk
away, but that would’ve been too sad.
But she did want to get back what she’d accidentally given away by
letting herself become known as Harry’s rival. She wanted to be a separate person again instead of Harry’s third leg, was that too much to
ask?
It was a hard trap to climb out of once you fell in. No matter how
high you scored in class, even if you did something that deserved a special
dinnertime announcement, it just meant you were rivaling Harry Potter
again.
But she thought she’d come up with a way.
Something to do that wouldn’t be seen as pushing up on the opposite
end of Harry Potter’s seesaw.
It would be hard.
It would go against her nature.
She would have to ﬁght someone very evil.
And she would need to ask someone even more evil for help.
Hermione raised her hand to knock upon that terrible door.
She hesitated.
Hermione realized she was being silly, and raised her hand a bit
higher.
She tried to knock again.
Her hand quite failed to touch the door.
And then the door swung open anyway.
*

520 *

**
*

EGOCENTRIC BIA S

*
*

*

“Dear me,” said the spider, sitting in its web. “Was it really that hard
to lose a single Quirrell point, Miss Granger?”
Hermione stood there with her hand raised, her cheeks growing
pink. It had been.
“Well, Miss Granger, I shall be merciful,” said the evil Professor Quirrell. “Consider it already lost. There, I have taken a hard choice from
you. Are you are not grateful?”
“Professor Quirrell,” Hermione managed to say in a voice that
squeaked a little. “I have a lot of Quirrell points, don’t I?”
“You do indeed,” said Professor Quirrell. “Though one less than you
had before. Terrible, isn’t it? Just think, if I don’t like your reason for
coming here, you could lose another ﬁfty. Maybe I’d take them away
one... by one... by one...”
Hermione’s cheeks were going even redder. “You’re really evil, did
anyone ever tell you that?”
“Miss Granger,” Professor Quirrell said gravely, “it can be dangerous
to give people compliments like that when they have not been truly
earned. The recipient might feel bashful and undeserving and want to
do something worthy of your praise. Now what was it you wanted to
talk to me about, Miss Granger?”

**
*
It was after lunch on Thursday afternoon, and Hermione and Harry
were ensconced in a little library nook, with a Quietus ﬁeld up so they
could talk. Harry was lying stomach-down on the ground with his elbows resting on the ﬂoor and his head in his hands and his feet kicking
up casually behind him. Hermione was occupying a stuﬀed chair much
too large for her, like she was the Hermione center of a candy shell.
Harry had suggested that they could, as a ﬁrst pass, read just the
titles of all the books in the library, and then Hermione could read all
the tables of contents.
Hermione had thought this was a brilliant idea. She’d never done
that with a library before.
*

521

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

Unfortunately there was a slight ﬂaw in this plan.
Namely, they were both Ravenclaws.
Hermione was reading a book called Magical Mnemonics.
Harry was reading a book called The Skeptical Wizard.
Each had thought it was just one special exception they would make
only this one time, and neither had yet realized it was impossible for
either of them to ever ﬁnish reading all the book titles no matter how
hard they tried.
The quiet of their little nook was broken by two words.
“Oh, no,” Harry suddenly said out loud, sounding like the words
had been torn out of him, and like he was trying very hard not to laugh.
There was a bit more quiet.
“He didn’t,” Harry said, in the same voice.
Then she heard Harry start giggling helplessly.
Hermione looked up from her book.
“All right,” she said, “what is it?”
“I just found out why you never ask the Weasleys about the family
rat,” Harry said. “It’s really awful and I shouldn’t be laughing and I’m a
terrible person.”
“Yes,” Hermione said primly, “you are. Tell me too.”
“Okay, ﬁrst the background. There’s a whole chapter in this book
about Sirius Black conspiracy theories. You remember who that is,
right?”
“Of course,” said Hermione. Sirius Black was a traitor, a friend of
James Potter who’d betrayed the location of Harry’s parents to Voldemort.
“So it turns out there were a number of, shall we say, irregularities,
associated with Black going to Azkaban. He didn’t get a trial, and the
Junior Minister in charge when the Aurors arrested Black was none other
than Cornelius Fudge, who became our current Minister of Magic.”
That sounded a little suspicious to Hermione too, and she said as
much.
Harry made a shrugging motion with his shoulders, as he lay on the
ﬂoor looking at his book. “Suspicious things happen all the time, and if
you’re a conspiracy theorist you can always ﬁnd something.”
*

522 *

**
*

EGOCENTRIC BIA S

*
*

*

“But no trial?” said Hermione.
“It was right after the Dark Lord’s defeat,” Harry said, his voice serious as he said it. “Things were incredibly chaotic, and when the Aurors
tracked down Black he was standing there laughing in a street ankle-deep
in blood, with twenty eyewitnesses to recount how he’d killed a friend
of my father’s named Peter Pettigrew plus twelve bystanders. I’m not
saying I approve of Black not getting a trial. But these are wizards we’re
talking about here, so it’s not really any more suspicious than, I don’t
know, the sort of thing people point to when they want to argue over
who shot John F. Kennedy. So anyway, Sirius Black is the wizarding
Lee Harvey Oswald. There’s all sorts of conspiracy theories about who
really betrayed my parents instead of him, and one of the favorites is
Peter Pettigrew, and this is where it starts getting complicated.”
Hermione listened, fascinated. “But how do you go from there to
the Weasleys’ pet rat—”
“Hold on,” said Harry, “I’m getting there. Now, after Pettigrew’s
death it came out that he’d been a spy for the Light—not a double agent,
just someone who snuck around and found things out. He’d been good
at that since he was a teenager, even in Hogwarts he had a reputation
for ﬁnding out all sorts of secrets. So the conspiracy theory is that Pettigrew became an unregistered Animagus while he was still in Hogwarts,
an Animagus of something small that could scurry around and listen to
conversations. The main problem being that successful Animagi are rare
and doing it as a teenager would be really unlikely, so of course the conspiracy theory says that my father and Black were unregistered Animagi
too. And in that conspiracy theory, Pettigrew himself killed the twelve
bystanders, turned into his small Animagus form, and ran. So Michael
Shermer says there are four additional problems with this. One, Black
was the only one who knew where my parents were.” (Harry’s voice
was a little hard as he said that.) “Two, Black was a more likely suspect
to start with than Pettigrew, there’s a rumor Black deliberately tried to
get a student killed during his time at Hogwarts, and he was from this
really nasty pureblood family, Bellatrix Black was literally his cousin.
Three, Black was twenty times the ﬁghting wizard that Pettigrew was,
even if he wasn’t as smart. The duel between them would have been like
*

523 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

Professor Quirrell versus Professor Sprout. Pettigrew probably didn’t
even get a chance to draw his wand, let alone fake all the evidence the
conspiracy theory requires. And four, Black was standing in the street
laughing.”
“But the rat—” said Hermione.
“Right,” Harry said. “Well, to make a long story short, Bill Weasley
decided that his little brother Percy’s pet rat was Pettigrew’s Animagus
form—”
Hermione’s jaw dropped.
“Yes,” Harry said, “you wouldn’t exactly expect Evil Pettigrew to be
living a sad and furtive life as the pet rat of an enemy wizarding family,
he’d either be with the Malfoys or, more likely, oﬀ in the Carribean after
a bit of plastic surgery. Anyway, Bill knocks out his little brother Percy,
stuns and grabs the rat, sends out all these emergency owl messages—”
“Oh, no!” Hermione said, the words torn out of her.
“—and somehow manages to gather Dumbledore, the Minister of
Magic, and the Head Auror—”
“He didn’t!” said Hermione.
“And of course when they get there they think he’s crazy, but they
use Veritas Oculum on the rat anyway, just to be sure, and what do they
discover?”
She would’ve died. “A rat.”
“You win a cookie! So they dragged poor Bill Weasley oﬀ to
St. Mungo’s and it turned out to be a pretty standard schizophrenic
break, it just happens to some people, especially young men around what
we’d consider college age. Guy was convinced he was ninety-seven years
old and had died and gone back in time to his younger self via train station. And he responded perfectly well to antipsychotics and is back to
normal and everything’s ﬁne now, except people don’t talk as much anymore about Sirius Black conspiracy theories, and you don’t ever ask the
Weasleys about the family rat.”
Hermione was giggling helplessly. It was really awful and she
shouldn’t be laughing and she was a terrible person.
“The thing I don’t understand,” Harry said, after their giggles had
died down, “is why Black would hunt down Pettigrew instead of running
*

524 *

**
*

EGOCENTRIC BIA S

*
*

*

as fast as he could. He had to know the Aurors would be after him.
I wonder if they got the reason out of Black before they took him to
Azkaban? See, this is why people who are absolutely positively guilty
still go through the legal system and get trials.”
Hermione had to agree with that.
Soon Harry was done with his book while Hermione was only
halfway through hers—hers was a much more diﬃcult book than
Harry’s, but she still felt embarrassed about that. And then she had
to put Magical Mnemonics back on the shelf and drag herself away, because it was time for her to face the most dreaded class in Hogwarts,
broomstick riding.
Harry tagged along as she walked there, even though his own class
wasn’t until an hour and a half later, like a ﬁghter jet escorting a sad little
propeller plane on its way to its own funeral.
The boy wished her goodbye in a quiet, sympathetic voice, and she
walked onto the grassy ﬁelds of Doom.
And there was much shrieking and almost falling and horrible brushes with death and the ground in completely the wrong place and the
sun getting in her eyes and Morag buzzing her and Mandy thinking she
was being subtle about always being near enough to catch her if she fell
and she knew the other students were laughing at both of them but she
never said anything to Mandy because she didn’t actually want to die.
After ten million years the class ended, and she was back on the
ground where she belonged until next Thursday. Sometimes she had
nightmares about it always being Thursday.
Why everyone had to learn this, when they were just going to Apparate or Floo or portkey everywhere once they grew up, was a complete
and utter mystery to Hermione. Nobody actually needed to ride broomsticks as an adult, it was like being forced to play dodgeball in P.E.
At least Harry had the decency to be ashamed of being good at it.

**
*

*

525 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

It was a couple of hours later, and she was in a Huﬄepuﬀ study hall with
Hannah, Susan, Leanne, and Megan. Professor Flitwick, surprisingly
diﬃdent for a teacher, had asked if she might possibly maybe help those
four with their Charms homework for a while, even though they weren’t
Ravenclaws, and Hermione had felt so proud she’d almost burst.
Hermione took a piece of parchment, spilled a little bit of ink on
it, tore it into four pieces, crumpled them, and tossed the pieces on the
table.
She could have gotten it just from crumpling it, but doing all that
made it more like garbage, and that helped when someone was ﬁrst practicing the Disposal Charm.
Hermione sharpened her ears and eyes, and said, “Okay, try it.”
“Everto.”
“Everto.”
“Everto.”
“Everto.”
Hermione didn’t think she’d quite caught all the problems. “Can
you all try it again?”
An hour later Hermione had concluded that (1), Leanne and Megan
were sort of sloppy, but if you asked them to keep practicing something,
they would, (2) Hannah and Susan were focused and driven to the point
where you had to keep telling them to slow down and relax and think
about things instead of trying so hard—it was odd to think that those
two would soon be hers—and (3) she liked helping Huﬄepuﬀs, the whole
study hall had a very cheerful atmosphere.
When she left for dinner, she found the Boy-Who-Lived reading a
book while he waited to escort her. It made her feel ﬂattered, and also a
little worried because Harry didn’t seem to really talk to anyone besides
her.
“Did you know there’s a fourth-year girl in Huﬄepuﬀ who’s a Metamorphmagus?” said Hermione as they headed toward the Great Hall.
“She makes her hair really red, like stopsign red not Weasley red, and
when she spilled hot tea on herself she turned into a black-haired boy
until she got it under control again.”
“Really? Cool,” said Harry, sounding a bit distracted. “Um, Her*

526 *

**
*

EGOCENTRIC BIA S

*
*

*

mione, just to check, you know tomorrow is the last day to sign up for
Professor Quirrell’s armies, right?”
“Yes,” Hermione said. “The armies of the evil Professor Quirrell.”
Her voice was a little angry, though Harry didn’t know why, of course.
“Hermione,” Harry said, his voice exasperated, “he’s not evil. He’s a
little bit Dark and a whole lot Slytherin. It’s not the same as being evil.”
Harry Potter had too many words for things, that was his problem.
He would have been better oﬀ if he’d just divided the universe into Good
and Bad. “Professor Quirrell called me up in front of the whole class and
told me to shoot someone!”
“He was right,” Harry said, his face sober. “I’m sorry, Hermione, but
he was. You should have shot me, I wouldn’t have minded. You can’t
learn Battle Magic if you can’t practice against real opponents using real
spells. And now you’re doing okay in sparring, aren’t you?”
Hermione was only twelve, and so she knew, but she couldn’t put it
into words, she couldn’t ﬁnd the thing to say that would convince Harry.
Professor Quirrell had taken a young girl and called up that girl in
front of everyone, and ordered her to open ﬁre without provocation on
a classmate.
It didn’t matter if Professor Quirrell was right about her needing to
learn it.
Professor McGonagall wouldn’t ever have done that.
Professor Flitwick wouldn’t ever have done that.
Maybe not even Professor Snape would have done that.
Professor Quirrell was evil.
But she couldn’t ﬁnd the words, and she knew that Harry would
never believe her.
“Hermione, I’ve talked to older students,” Harry said. “Professor
Quirrell could be the only competent Defense Professor we get in all
seven years at Hogwarts. Anything else we can learn later. If we want
to study Defense, we have to do it this year. The students who sign up
for the extracurricular stuﬀ are going to be learning huge amounts, way
beyond what the Ministry thinks ﬁrst-years are supposed to study—did
you know we’re going to be learning the Patronus Charm? In January?”
“The Patronus Charm?” Hermione said, her voice going up in sur*

527 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

prise.
Her books said that was one of the brightest magics known, a weapon
against the Darkest creatures, cast with pure positive emotions. It wasn’t
something she’d expect the evil Professor Quirrell to teach—or arrange
to be taught, since Hermione couldn’t imagine he could do the spell
himself.
“Yes,” Harry said. “Students don’t usually learn the Patronus Charm
until their ﬁfth years or even later! But Professor Quirrell says the Ministry schedules were made up by talking Flobberworms, and the ability
to cast the Patronus Charm depends on emotions more than magical
strength. Professor Quirrell says that he thinks most students do way
less than they can, and this year he’s going to prove it.”
There was the usual tone of awed worship that Harry’s voice had
when he talked about Professor Quirrell, and Hermione gritted her teeth
and kept walking.
“I already signed up, actually,” Hermione said, her voice a little quiet.
“I did it this morning. For everything, just like you said.”
In for a penny, in for a pound was the usual expression.
Besides, she didn’t want to lose, and if she wanted to win she had to
learn.
“So you will be in the armies, then?” Harry’s voice was suddenly
enthusiastic. “That’s awesome, Hermione! I’ve already gotten my list
of soldiers, but I’m sure Professor Quirrell will let me add one more, or
trade—”
“I’m not joining your army.” Hermione’s voice was sharp. She knew
it was a reasonable assumption but it still annoyed her.
Harry blinked. “Not Draco Malfoy’s, surely. So you want to be in
the third army? Even though we don’t know who the general is yet?”
Harry sounded surprised and a little wounded, and she couldn’t blame
him, though of course she did blame him, since in fact it was all his fault.
“But why not mine?”
“Think about it,” Hermione snapped, “and maybe you’ll work it
out!”
And she sped up her stride and left Harry gaping behind her.

*

528 *

**
*

EGOCENTRIC BIA S

*
*

*

**
*

“Professor Quirrell,” Draco said in his most formal voice, “I must protest
your appointment of Hermione Granger as the third general.”
“Oh?” said Professor Quirrell, leaning back in his chair in a casual
and relaxed manner. “Protest away, Mr. Malfoy.”
“Granger is unﬁt for the position,” said Draco.
Professor Quirrell tapped a ﬁnger on his cheek thoughtfully. “Why
yes, yes she is. Do you have any further protests?”
“Professor Quirrell,” said Harry Potter beside him, “with all due
respect to Miss Granger’s many outstanding academic talents and the
Quirrell points she has justly earned in your classes, her personality is
not suited to military command.”
Draco had been relieved when Harry had agreed to accompany him
to Professor Quirrell’s oﬃce. It wasn’t just that Harry was a gigantic
blatant teacher’s pet where Professor Quirrell was concerned. Draco
had also started to worry that Harry actually was friends with Granger,
it had been a while now and he still hadn’t made his move... but this was
more like it.
“I agree with Mr. Potter,” said Draco. “Appointing her as a general
turns it into a farce.”
“Harshly put,” said Harry, “but I cannot bring myself to disagree
with Mr. Malfoy. To be blunt, Professor Quirrell, Hermione Granger
has around as much intent to kill as a bowl of wet grapes.”
“That,” said Professor Quirrell mildly, “is not a thing I would fail to
notice myself. You are telling me nothing I do not already know.”
It was Draco’s turn to say something, but the conversation had suddenly hiccupped. That answer had not been in the possibilities he and
Harry had brainstormed before coming here. What did you say after the
teacher said that he knew everything you knew and he was still going to
commit an obvious mistake?
The silence stretched.
“Is this some sort of plot?” Harry said slowly.
*

529 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

“Must everything I do be some sort of plot?” said Professor Quirrell.
“Can’t I ever create chaos just for the sake of chaos?”
Draco almost choked.
“Not in your Battle Magic class,” Harry said with calm certainty.
“Other places, maybe, but not there.”
Professor Quirrell slowly raised his eyebrows.
Harry gazed steadily back at him.
Draco shivered.
“Well then,” Professor Quirrell said. “Neither of you seem to have
considered a very simple question. Who could I appoint instead of Miss
Granger?”
“Blaise Zabini,” Draco said without hesitation.
“Any other suggestions?” said Professor Quirrell, sounding quite
amused.
Anthony Goldstein and Ernie Macmillan, came the thought, before
Draco’s common sense kicked in and ruled out mudbloods and Hufﬂepuﬀs no matter how aggressively they dueled. So instead Draco just
said, “What’s wrong with Zabini?”
“I see...” Harry said slowly.
“I don’t,” said Draco. “Why not Zabini?”
Professor Quirrell looked at Draco. “Because, Mr. Malfoy, no matter
how hard he tries, he’ll never be able to keep up with you or Mr. Potter.”
The shock of it staggered Draco. “You can’t believe Granger is going
to—”
“He’s gambling on her,” Harry said quietly. “It’s not guaranteed.
The odds aren’t even good. She’ll probably never give us a good ﬁght,
and even if she does, it may take her months to learn. But she’s the only
one in our year with any chance at all of growing to beat us.”
Draco’s hands twitched but didn’t clench into ﬁsts. Showing up as
your supporter and then backing out was a classic undermining tactic,
so Harry Potter was in it with Granger and that implied—
“But Professor,” Harry went on smoothly, “I’m worried Hermione
will be miserable as the general of an army. I’m speaking as her friend
now, Professor Quirrell. The competition might be good for Draco and
I, but what you’re asking her to do isn’t good for her!”
*

530 *

**
*

EGOCENTRIC BIA S

*
*

*

Never mind.
“Your friendship for Hermione Granger does you credit,” Professor
Quirrell said dryly. “Especially as you are able to be friends with Draco
Malfoy at the same time. Quite a feat, that.”
Harry suddenly looked a little nervous, meaning he probably felt a
lot more nervous, and Draco silently swore to himself. Of course Harry
wasn’t going to fool Professor Quirrell.
“And I doubt Miss Granger would appreciate your friendly concern,”
said Professor Quirrell. “She asked me for the position, Mr. Potter, I did
not ask her.”
Harry was quiet at this for a moment. Then he ﬂashed Draco a quick
look that mixed apology and warning, saying at the same time, Sorry, I
did my best and We’d better not press it any further.
“As for her being miserable,” Professor Quirrell went on, a slight
smile now playing about his lips, “I suspect that she will have a much
easier time with the rigors of her position than either of you suspect,
and that she will put up a good ﬁght much sooner than you think.”
Harry and Draco both gasped in horror.
“You’re not going to advise her, are you?” said Draco, utterly aghast.
“I never signed up to ﬁght you!” said Harry.
The smile playing around Professor Quirrell’s lips grew wider. “As
a matter of fact, I did oﬀer to share a few suggestions regarding Miss
Granger’s ﬁrst battles.”
“Professor Quirrell!” said Harry.
“Oh, don’t worry,” Professor Quirrell said. “She turned me down.
Just as I expected.”
Draco’s eyes narrowed.
“Dear me, Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell, “didn’t anyone ever
tell you it’s rude to stare?”
“You’re not going to secretly help her some other way, are you?” said
Harry.
“Would I do that?” said Professor Quirrell.
“Yes,” said Draco and Harry at the same time.
“I am wounded by your lack of trust. Well then, I promise not to help
General Granger in any way that the two of you don’t know about. And
*

531

*

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

now I suggest that both of you be about your military aﬀairs. November
approaches, and swiftly.”

**
*
Draco saw the implications before the door had closed all the way behind
them on their way out of Professor Quirrell’s oﬃce.
Harry had once spoken dismissively of “people stuﬀ”.
And now that was Draco’s only hope.
Let him not realize, let him not realize...
“We should just attack the Granger girl ﬁrst and get her out of our
way,” said Draco. “After we crush her, we can have our own contest
without any distractions.”
“Now that doesn’t really seem fair to her, does it?” said Harry in a
mild voice.
“What do you care?” said Draco. “She’s your rival, right?” Then,
with just the right note of suspicion in his voice, “Don’t tell me you’ve
started really liking her, after being her rival all this time...”
“Founders forbid,” said Harry. “What can I say, Draco? I merely
have a natural sense of justice. Granger does too, you know. She has a
very ﬁrm grasp on good and evil, and she’s probably going to attack evil
ﬁrst. Having a name like ‘Malfoy’ is just asking for it, you know.”
Damn it!
“Harry,” said Draco, sounding wounded and maybe a little superior,
“don’t you want to ﬁght fairly against me?”
“You mean rather than attacking you after you’ve already lost some
of your forces beating Granger?” said Harry. “Oh, I don’t know. Maybe
after I get bored with just winning I’ll try that ‘fair’ thing.”
“Maybe she’ll attack you,” Draco said. “You’re her rival.”
“But I’m her friendly rival,” Harry said with an evil grin. “I bought
her a nice birthday present and everything. You wouldn’t go around
sabotaging your friendly rival like that.”
“What about sabotaging your friend’s chance at a fair ﬁght?” said
Draco angrily. “I thought we were friends!”
*

532 *

**
*

EGOCENTRIC BIA S

*
*

*

“Let me rephrase that,” said Harry. “Granger wouldn’t sabotage a
friendly rival. But that’s because she has the killing intention of a bowl
of wet grapes. You would. You totally would. And guess what, so would
I.”
Damn it!

**
*
If it had been a play, there would have been dramatic music.
The hero, impeccably turned out in green-trimmed robes and perfectly combed white-blonde hair, faced the villain.
The villain, leaning back in a simple wooden chair with her buckteeth clearly visible and stray chestnut curls drifting over her cheeks,
faced the hero.
It was Wednesday, October 30th, and the ﬁrst battle was coming up
on Sunday.
Draco was standing in General Granger’s oﬃce, a room the size of a
small classroom. (Why each general’s oﬃce was so large, Draco wasn’t
quite sure. A chair and a desk would have worked for him. He wasn’t
even clear on why the generals needed oﬃces at all, his soldiers knew
where to ﬁnd him. Unless Professor Quirrell had deliberately arranged
the huge oﬃces for them as a sign of status, in which case Draco was all
for it.)
Granger sat on the room’s single chair like a throne, all the way on
the other end of the oﬃce from where the door opened. There was a long
oblong table stretched across the middle of the room between them, and
four small circular tables scattered around the corners, but only that one
single chair, all the way at the opposite end. The room had windows
along one wall, and one beam of sunlight touched the top of Granger’s
hair like a glowing crown.
It would have been nice if Draco could have walked slowly forward.
But there was a table in the way, and Draco had to go around it diagonally, and there was no good way to do that in a dramatic and digniﬁed
fashion. Had that been deliberate? If it had been his father, it surely
would have been; but this was Granger, so surely not.
*

533 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

There was nowhere for him to sit, and Granger hadn’t stood up,
either.
Draco kept the outrage entirely oﬀ his face.
“Well, Mr. Draco Malfoy,” Granger said once he stood before her,
“you requested an audience with me and I have been so gracious as to
grant it. What was your plea?”
Come with me to visit Malfoy Manor, my father and I would like to show
you some interesting spells.
“Your rival, Potter, came to me with an oﬀer,” said Draco, putting a
serious look on his face. “He doesn’t mind losing to me, but would be
humiliated if you won. So he wants to join with me and wipe you out
immediately, not just in our ﬁrst battle, all of them. If I won’t do that,
Potter wants me to hold back or harass you, while he launches an all-out
attack on you as his ﬁrst move.”
“I see,” Granger said, looking surprised. “And you’re oﬀering to help
me against him?”
“Of course,” said Draco smoothly. “I didn’t think what he wanted
to do to you was fair.”
“Why, that’s very nice of you, Mr. Malfoy,” said Granger. “I’m sorry
for how I spoke to you earlier. We should be friends. Can I call you
Drakey?”
Alarm bells started to sound in Draco’s head, but there was a chance
she meant it...
“Of course,” said Draco, “if I can call you Hermy.”
Draco was pretty sure he saw her expression ﬂicker.
“Anyway,” Draco said, “I was thinking it would serve Potter right if
we both attacked him and wiped him out.”
“But that wouldn’t be fair to Mr. Potter, would it?” said Granger.
“I think it’d be very fair,” Draco said. “He was planning to do it to
you ﬁrst.”
Granger was giving him a stern look that could possibly have intimidated him if he’d been a Huﬄepuﬀ instead of a Malfoy. “You think I’m
pretty stupid, don’t you, Mr. Malfoy?”
Draco smiled charmingly. “No, Miss Granger, but I thought I’d at
least check. So, what do you want?”
*

534 *

**
*

EGOCENTRIC BIA S

*
*

*

“Are you oﬀering to bribe me?” said Granger.
“Sure,” said Draco. “Can I just slip you a Galleon and have you beat
on Potter instead of me for the rest of the year?”
“Nope,” said Granger, “but you can oﬀer me ten Galleons and have
me attack both of you equally, instead of just you.”
“Ten Galleons is a lot of money,” Draco said cautiously.
“I didn’t know the Malfoys were poor,” said Granger.
Draco stared at Granger.
He was starting to get a strange feeling about this.
That particular reply didn’t seem like it should have come from this
particular girl.
“Well,” said Draco, “you don’t get to be rich by wasting money, you
know.”
“I don’t know if you know what a dentist is, Mr. Malfoy, but my
parents are dentists and anything less than ten Galleons isn’t worth my
time at all.”
“Three Galleons,” Draco said, more as a probe than anything else.
“Nope,” said Granger. “If you want an equal ﬁght at all, I don’t believe that a Malfoy wants an equal ﬁght less than he wants ten Galleons.”
Draco was starting to get a very strange feeling about this.
“No,” said Draco.
“No?” said Granger. “This is a limited time oﬀer, Mr. Malfoy. Are
you sure you want to risk a whole year of being miserably crushed by
the Boy-Who-Lived? That would be pretty embarrassing for the House
of Malfoy, wouldn’t it?”
It was a very persuasive argument, one that was hard to refuse, but
you didn’t get to be rich by spending money when your heart told you
it was a setup.
“No,” said Draco.
“See you on Sunday,” said Granger.
Draco turned and walked out of the oﬃce without another word.
That had been not right...

**
*
*

535 *

**
*

CHAPTER TWENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

“Hermione,” Harry said patiently, “we’re supposed to be plotting against
each other. You could even betray me and it wouldn’t mean anything
outside the battleﬁeld.”
Hermione shook her head. “It wouldn’t be nice, Harry.”
Harry sighed. “I don’t think you’re getting into the spirit of this at
all.”
It wouldn’t be nice. She’d actually said that. Hermione didn’t know
whether to be insulted at what Harry thought of her, or worried about
whether she really did sound like that much of a goody-two-shoes usually.
It was probably time to change the subject.
“Anyway, are you doing anything special for tomorrow?” said Hermione. “It’s—”
Her voice cut oﬀ abruptly as she realized.
“Yes, Hermione,” Harry said a little tightly, “what day is it?”
Interlude:
There was a time when October 31st had been called Halloween in
magical Britain.
Now it was Harry Potter Day.
Harry had turned down all the oﬀers, even the one from Minister
Fudge which might have been good for future political favors and which
he really should have gritted his teeth and taken. But to Harry, October
31st would always be The Dark Lord Killed My Parents Day. There
should have been a quiet, digniﬁed memorial service somewhere, and if
there was one, he hadn’t been invited.
Hogwarts got the day oﬀ to celebrate. Even the Slytherins didn’t dare
wear black outside their own dorm. There were special events and special foods and the teachers looked the other way if anyone ran through
the hallways. It was the tenth anniversary, after all.
Harry spent the day in his trunk so as not to spoil it for anyone else,
eating snack bars in place of meals, reading some of his sadder science
ﬁction books (no fantasy), and writing a letter to Mum and Dad that was
much longer than the ones he usually sent.
*

536 *

CHAPTER

THIRT Y

WORKING IN GROUPS,
PART I
he day was Sunday, November 3rd, and soon the three great powers
of their school year, Harry Potter, Draco Malfoy, and Hermione
Granger, would begin their struggle for supreme dominance.
(Harry was slightly annoyed by the way the Boy-Who-Lived had
been demoted from supreme dominance to one of three equal rivals just
by entering the contest, but he expected to get it back soon.)
The battleground was a section of non-Forbidden forest, dense with
trees, because Professor Quirrell thought that being able to see all the
enemy forces was too boring even for your very ﬁrst battle.
All the students who were not actually in a ﬁrst-year army were
camped out nearby and watching on screens that Professor Quirrell had
set up. Except for three Gryﬃndors in their fourth year, who were currently sick and conﬁned to healer’s beds by Madam Pomfrey. Aside from
that, everyone was there.
The students were dressed, not in their ordinary school robes, but in
Muggle camouﬂage uniforms that Professor Quirrell had obtained somewhere and supplied in suﬃcient quantity and variety to ﬁt everyone. It
wasn’t that students would have worried about stains and rips, that was
what Charms were for. But as Professor Quirrell had explained to the
surprised wizardborns, nice digniﬁed clothing was not eﬃcient for hiding in forests or dodging around trees.
And on each uniform’s breast, a patch bearing the name and insignia
of your army. A small patch. If you wanted your soldiers to wear, say,

T

*

537 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

colored ribbons so that they could identify each other at a distance, and
risk the enemy getting their hands on the ribbons, that was all up to you.
Harry had tried to get the name Dragon Army.
Draco had pitched a ﬁt and said that would confuse everyone completely.
Professor Quirrell had ruled that Draco could lay prior claim to the
name, if he wished.
So now Harry was ﬁghting Dragon Army.
This probably wasn’t a good sign.
For their insignia, instead of the too-obvious dragon’s head breathing
ﬁre, Draco had elected to simply go with the ﬁre. Elegant, understated,
deadly: This is what’s left after we’ve passed. Very Malfoy.
Harry, after considering alternate choices such as the 501st Provisional Battalion and Harry’s Minions o’ Doom, had decided that his
army would be known by the simple and digniﬁed appellation of the
Chaos Legion.
Their insignia was a hand poised with ﬁngers ready to snap.
It was universally agreed that this wasn’t a good sign.
Harry had earnestly advised Hermione that the young boys serving
under her were probably nervous about her being a girl with a reputation
for being nice, and that she should pick something scary that would
reassure them of her toughness and make them proud to be part of her
army, like the Blood Commandos or something.
Hermione had named her army the Sunshine Regiment.
Their insignia was a smiley face.
And in ten minutes, they would be at war.
Harry stood in the bright forest clearing that was their assigned starting location, an area of open space with old and rotting tree stumps that
had been cleared away for some unknown purpose, ground coated with
a small scattering of blown leaves and the dried grey remnants of grass
that had failed the test of summer’s heat, and the sun shining down brilliantly from above.
Around him were the twenty-three soldiers that Professor Quirrell
had assigned to him. Nearly all of Gryﬃndor had signed up, of course,
and more than half of Slytherin, and less than half of Huﬄepuﬀ, and a
*

538 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

handful of Ravenclaw. In Harry’s army there were twelve Gryﬃndors
and six Slytherins and four Huﬄepuﬀs and one Ravenclaw besides himself... not that there was any way to tell that by looking at the uniforms.
No red, no green, no yellow, no blue. Just Muggle camouﬂage patterns,
and a patch on the breast with the device of a hand poised to snap its
ﬁngers.
Harry looked upon his twenty-three soldiers, all wearing the same
uniforms with no marks of group identity save that single patch.
And lo, Harry smiled, because he understood what this part of Professor Quirrell’s master plan was about; and Harry was taking full advantage of it for his own purposes, too.
There was a legendary episode in social psychology called the Robbers Cave experiment. It had been set up in the bewildered aftermath of
World War II, with the intent of investigating the causes and remedies
of conﬂicts between groups. The scientists had set up a summer camp
for 22 boys from 22 diﬀerent schools, selecting them to all be from stable middle-class families. The ﬁrst phase of the experiment had been
intended to investigate what it took to start a conﬂict between groups.
The 22 boys had been divided into two groups of 11—
—and this had been quite suﬃcient.
The hostility had started from the moment the two groups had become aware of each others’ existences in the state park, insults being
hurled on the ﬁrst meeting. They’d named themselves the Eagles and the
Rattlers (they hadn’t needed names for themselves when they thought
they were the only ones in the park) and had proceeded to develop contrasting group stereotypes, the Rattlers thinking of themselves as roughand-tough and swearing heavily, the Eagles correspondingly deciding to
think of themselves as upright-and-proper.
The other part of the experiment had been testing how to resolve
group conﬂicts. Bringing the boys together to watch ﬁreworks hadn’t
worked at all. They’d just shouted at each other and stayed apart. What
had worked was warning them that there might be vandals in the park,
and the two groups needing to work together to solve a failure of the
park’s water system. A common task, a common enemy.
Harry had a strong suspicion Professor Quirrell had understood this
*

539 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

principle very well indeed when he had chosen to create three armies per
year.
Three armies.
Not four.
And deﬁnitely not segregated by House... except that no Slytherins
had been assigned to Draco besides Mr. Crabbe and Mr. Goyle.
It was things like this which reassured Harry that Professor Quirrell,
despite his aﬀected Dark atmosphere and his pretense of neutrality in the
conﬂict between Good and Evil, was secretly backing Good, not that
Harry would ever dare say that out loud.
And Harry had decided to take full advantage of Professor Quirrell’s
plan to deﬁne a group identity his way.
The Rattlers, once they’d met the Eagles, had started thinking of
themselves as rough-and-tough, and they’d conducted themselves accordingly.
The Eagles had thought of themselves as good-and-proper.
And in that bright forest clearing, scattered around the old and rotting tree stumps, outlined in the sun shining down brilliantly from
above, General Potter and his twenty-three soldiers were arranged in
nothing remotely resembling a formation. Some soldiers stood, some
soldiers sat, some stood on one leg just to be diﬀerent.
It was the Chaos Legion, after all.
And if there wasn’t a reason to stand in neat little lines, Harry had
said disdainfully, there weren’t going to be neat little lines.
Harry had divided the army into 6 squads of 4 soldiers each, each
squad commanded by a Squad Suggester. All troops were under strict
orders to disobey any orders they were given if it seemed like a good idea
at the time, including that one... unless Harry or the Squad Suggester
preﬁxed the order with “Merlin says”, in which case you were supposed
to actually obey.
The Chaos Legion’s chief attack was to split up and run in from multiple directions, randomly changing vectors and ﬁring the approved sleep
spell as rapidly as you could rebuild the magical strength. And if you saw
a chance to distract or confuse the enemy, you took it.
Fast. Creative. Unpredictable. Non-homogenous. Don’t just obey
*

540 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

orders, think about whether what you’re doing right now makes sense.
Harry wasn’t quite as sure as he’d pretended that this was the optimum of military eﬃciency... but he’d been given a golden opportunity
to change how some students thought about themselves, and that was how
he intended to use it.
Five minutes to wartime, according to Harry’s watch.
General Potter walked (not marched) over to where his air force was
waiting tensely, broomsticks already clutched ﬁrmly in their hands.
“All wings report in,” said General Potter. They’d rehearsed this
during their one training session on Saturday.
“Red Leader standing by,” said Seamus Finnigan, who had no idea
what it meant.
“Red Five standing by,” said Dean Thomas, who’d waited his entire
life to say it.
“Green Leader standing by,” Theodore Nott said rather stiﬄy.
“Green Forty-One standing by,” Tracey Davis said.
“I want you in the air the instant we hear the bell,” said General
Potter. “Do not engage, repeat, do not engage. Evade if under ﬁre.” (Of
course you did not aim sleep spells at broomsticks; you ﬁred a spell that
gave a temporary red glow to whatever it hit. If you hit the broomstick
or the rider, they were out of the war.) “Red Leader and Red Five, ﬂy
toward Malfoy’s army as fast as you can, stay as high as you can while still
seeing them, return the instant you know for sure what they’re doing.
Green Leader, do the same for Granger’s army. Green Forty-One, ﬂy
above us and watch for any approaching broomsticks or soldiers, you
and only you are authorized to ﬁre. And remember, I didn’t say ‘Merlin
says’ for any of that, but we do really need the information. For Chaos!”
“For Chaos!” the four echoed with varying degrees of enthusiasm.
Harry expected Hermione to launch an immediate attack on Draco,
in which case he’d move his troops into position and start supporting
her, but only after she’d taken severe losses and caused some damage.
He would frame it as a heroic rescue, if possible; it wouldn’t do to have
Sunshine thinking that Chaos wasn’t their friend, after all.
But just in case she didn’t... well, that was why the Chaos Legion was
staying put until Green Leader reported back.
*

541

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

Draco’s moves would be in his own self-interest. He would predictably ready his army to defend against Hermione; he might or might
not realize that Harry had been lying about waiting to attack until after that battle ﬁnished. Harry had still put two broomsticks on Dragon
Army, just in case they were doing something, and just in case Draco or
Mr. Goyle or Mr. Crabbe was good enough to shoot a broomstick out
of the sky.
But General Granger was the unpredictable one, and Harry couldn’t
move until he knew how she was moving.

**
*
In the heart of the forest, with shadow patterns dancing on the ground as
leafy canopies swayed high above, General Malfoy stood where the trees
were relatively sparser, and looked out on his troops with calm satisfaction. Six units of three troops each, the Aerial Unit of four (to which
Gregory was assigned), and the Command Unit, which was himself and
Vincent. They’d only drilled for a short time on the previous Saturday,
but Draco was conﬁdent that he’d managed to explain the basics. Stay
with your mates, watch their back and trust them to watch yours. Move
as a single body. Obey orders and show no fear. Aim, ﬁre, move, aim
again, ﬁre again.
The six units were formed up in a defensive perimeter around Draco,
watchfully gazing outward into the forest. Back-to-back they stood,
wands gripped low until they needed to strike.
They already looked remarkably like the Auror units whose training
Draco had watched during his father’s inspections.
Chaos and Sunshine weren’t going to know what hit them.
“Attention,” said General Malfoy.
The six units unfolded and spun toward Draco; the faces of his
broomstick riders turned from where they stood with broomsticks already in hand.
*

542 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

Draco had decided to wait on demanding salutes until after they won
their ﬁrst battle, when Gryﬃndors and Huﬄepuﬀs would be more willing to salute a Malfoy.
But his soldiers were already standing straight enough, especially the
Gryﬃndors, that Draco wondered if he’d even needed to delay. Gregory had quietly listened, and reported back that Draco’s volunteering to
stand by Harry Potter in Defense class, that time when Professor Quirrell had taught Harry how to lose, had marked Draco as an acceptable
commander. At least if you happened to be assigned to his army. Not
all Slytherins are alike; there are Slytherins, and then there are Slytherins
was what the Gryﬃndors in Draco’s army were quoting to their Housemates.
Draco was frankly astounded at how incredibly easy that had been.
Draco had protested at ﬁrst about not being assigned any Slytherins, and
Professor Quirrell had told him that if he wanted to be the ﬁrst Malfoy
to gain complete political control of the country, he needed to learn how
to govern the other three-quarters of the population. It was things like
this which reassured Draco that Professor Quirrell had a great deal more
sympathy for the good guys than Professor Quirrell was letting on.
The actual battle wouldn’t be easy, especially if Granger did attack
the Dragons ﬁrst. Draco had agonized over whether to commit all his
forces against Granger immediately in a preemptive strike, but had worried that (1) Harry had been misleading him completely about what
Granger was likely to do, and (2) Harry had been misleading him about
waiting until after Granger’s attack to join the battle.
Though Dragon Army had a secret weapon, three of them in fact,
which might be enough to win even if they were attacked by both armies
at once...
It was almost time, and that meant it was time for the pre-battle
speech that Draco had composed and memorized.
“The battle is about to begin,” Draco said. His voice was calm and
precise. “Remember everything that I and Mr. Crabbe and Mr. Goyle
showed you. An army wins because it is disciplined and deadly. General
Potter and the Chaos Legion will not be disciplined. Granger and the
Sunshine Regiment will not be deadly. We are disciplined, we are deadly,
*

543 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

we are Dragons. The battle is about to begin, and we are about to win
it.”

**
*
(Ex tempore speech given by General Potter to the Chaos Legion, immediately before their ﬁrst battle, on November 3rd, 1991, at 2:56pm:)
My troops, I’m not going to lie to you, our situation today is very
grim. Dragon Army has never lost a single battle. And Hermione Granger... has a very good memory. The truth is, most of you are probably
going to die. And the survivors will envy the dead. But we have to win
this. We have to win this so that someday, our children can enjoy the
taste of chocolate again. Everything is at stake here. Literally everything. If we lose, the whole universe just blinks out like a light bulb.
And now I realize that most of you don’t know what a light bulb is.
Well, take it from me, it’s bad. But if we have to go down, let’s go down
ﬁghting, like heroes, so that as the darkness closes in, we can think to
ourselves, at least we had fun. Are you afraid to die? I know I am. I can
feel those cold shivers of fear like someone is pumping ice cream into
my shirt. But I know... that history is watching us. It was watching us
when we changed into our uniforms. It was probably taking pictures.
And history, my troops, is written by the victors. If we win this, we can
write our own history. A history in which Hogwarts was founded by
four renegade house elves. We can make everyone study that history,
even though it isn’t true, and if they don’t answer the right way on our
tests... they’ll fail the class. Isn’t that worth dying for? No, don’t answer
that. Some things are better left unknown. None of us know why we’re
here. None of us know why we’re ﬁghting. We just woke up in these
uniforms in this mysterious forest, knowing only that there was no way
to get our names and memories back except victory. The students in
those other armies out there... they’re just like us. They don’t want to
die. They’re ﬁghting to protect each other, the only friends they have
left. They’re ﬁghting because they know they have families who’ll miss
them, even if they can’t remember now. They may even be ﬁghting to
save the world. But we have a better reason to ﬁght than they do. We
*

544 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

ﬁght because we like it. We ﬁght to amuse eldritch monstrosities from
beyond Space and Time. We ﬁght because we’re Chaos. Soon the ﬁnal
battle will begin, so let me say now, because I won’t get a chance later,
that it was an honor to be your commander, however brieﬂy. Thank
you, thank you all. And remember, your goal isn’t just to cut down the
enemy, it’s to make them afraid.

**
*
A great booming gong echoed over the forest.
And the Sunshine Regiment began to march.

**
*
The tension rose and rose, as Harry and the nineteen other soldiers who
remained waited for the aerial warriors to report back. It shouldn’t
take long, broomsticks were fast and the distances in the forest were
not great—
Two broomsticks approached, at speed, from the direction of Draco’s
camp, and all the soldiers tensed. They weren’t executing the maneuvers
that were today’s code for a friendly broomstick.
“Scatter and ﬁre!” roared General Potter, and then suited action to
words, scurrying oﬀ at top speed toward the forest cover; and then as
soon as Harry was among the trees, he spun back, raised his wand, tried
to seek out the broomstick in the sky—
“Clear!” shouted a voice. “They’re heading back!”
Harry gave a mental shrug. There’d been no way to prevent Draco
from obtaining that information, and he’d only learn that they’d been
standing still.
And the Chaotics slowly emerged from the forest—
“Broomstick approaching from Granger’s direction!” yelled another
voice. “I think it’s Green Leader, he did the dip and roll!”
Moments later Theodore Nott dived out of the sky and pulled up in
the midst of the soldiers.
*

545 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

“Granger has divided her forces in two!” yelled Nott as he hovered
on his broomstick. There was sweat staining his uniform, and all the
reserve was gone from his voice. “She’s attacking both armies! Two
brooms covering each force, they pursued me halfway here!”
Divided her army, what on Earth—
A large force concentrating ﬁre on a small force could deplete that
force rapidly without taking much damage in return. If twenty soldiers
faced ten soldiers, twenty sleep spells would be aimed at the ten soldiers
with only ten sleep spells going the other way, so unless every one of
those ﬁrst sleep spells hit its target, the smaller force would lose more
people than they could manage to take down with them. Defeated in
detail was the military term for what happened when you divided your
forces like that. What could Hermione possibly be thinking...
Then Harry realized.
She’s being fair.
It was going to be a long year in Defense class.
“All right,” Harry said loudly, so the army could hear. “We’ll
wait until the Red Wing reports in, and then we’ll go cloud up some
Sunshine.”

**
*
Draco listened to the ﬂyers’ reports with his face calm, all his shock
concealed inside. What could Granger possibly be thinking?
Then Draco realized.
It’s a feint.
One of Sunshine’s two forces would change direction, and both
would converge on... who?

**
*
Neville Longbottom marched through the forest toward the approaching
Sunny force, occasionally glancing up at the sky for broomsticks. Beside
him marched his squad comrades, Melvin Coote and Lavender Brown
of Gryﬃndor, and Allen Flint of Slytherin. Allen Flint was their Squad
*

546 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

Suggester, though Harry had ﬁrst said to Neville, in private, that the
position was his if he wanted it.
Harry had said quite a lot of things to Neville in private, starting with
“You know, Neville, if you want to become as awesome as the imaginary
Neville who lives in your head but isn’t allowed to do anything because
you’re scared, then you really should sign up for Professor Quirrell’s
armies.”
Neville was now sure the Boy-Who-Lived could read minds. There
was just no other way Harry Potter could’ve known. Neville had never
talked about that with anyone, or given any sign; and other people
weren’t like that, not that Neville had ever noticed.
And Harry’s promise had come true, this did feel diﬀerent from sparring in Defense class. Neville had hoped that sparring would ﬁx everything that was wrong with him, and, well, it hadn’t. Even if he could ﬁre
a few spells at another student in class with Professor Quirrell watching
to make sure nothing went wrong, even if he could dodge and ﬁre back
when it was allowed and everyone else was expecting it and they would
stare at him funny if he didn’t do it, none of that was the same as being
able to stand up for himself.
But being part of an army...
Something strange was stirring inside Neville, as he marched through
the forest alongside his comrades, upon their uniforms an insignia of
ﬁngers poised to snap.
He was allowed to walk if he wanted to, but he just felt like marching.
Beside him, Melvin and Lavender and Allen all seemed to feel like
marching too.
And Neville softly began to sing the Song of Chaos.
The tune was what a Muggle would have identiﬁed as John Williams’s
Imperial March, also known as “Darth Vader’s Theme”; and the words
Harry had added were easy to remember.

Doom doom doom
Doom doom doom doom doom doom
Doom doom doom
*

547 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

Doom doom doom doom doom doom
Doom doom doom
Doom doom doom-doom-doom doom doom
Doom doom-doom-doom doom doom
Doom doom doom, doom doom doom.
By the second line the others had joined in, and soon you could hear
the same soft chant coming from nearby parts of the forest.
And Neville marched alongside his fellow Chaos Legionnaires,
strange feelings stirring in his heart,
imagination becoming reality,
as from his lips poured a fearful song of doom.

**
*
Harry stared at the bodies scattered across the forest. Something inside
him felt a bit queasy, and he had to remind himself hard that they were
only sleeping. There were girls among the fallen, and that made it a lot
worse somehow, and he would have to be careful never to mention that
in front of Hermione or the Aurors would ﬁnd his remains stuﬀed into
a small teapot.
Half of Sunshine army hadn’t put up much of a ﬁght against all of
Chaos. The nine ground soldiers had run in screaming inarticulately
with Simple Shields raised, circular screens to protect their faces and
chests. But you couldn’t ﬁre and hold the shield at the same time, and
Harry’s soldiers had simply aimed for the legs. All but one of the Sunnies had fallen over as soon as the cries of “Somnium!” ﬁlled the air. That
last one had dropped her shield and managed to take out one of Harry’s
soldiers before being hit by the second wave of sleep spells (the Sleep
Hex was safe for multiple hits). The two Sunny broomsticks had been
much harder to take down and had accounted for three Chaotics before
being auraed by massed ground ﬁre.
Hermione wasn’t among the fallen. Draco must have gotten her and
that was making Harry feel angry on some completely incomprehensible
*

548 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

level, he wasn’t sure if he was feeling protective toward Hermione, or
cheated that he hadn’t been the one to do it, or maybe both.
“All right,” Harry said, raising his voice. “Let’s everyone be clear on
one thing, that wasn’t a real ﬁght. That was General Granger making
a mistake in her ﬁrst battle. Today’s actual ﬁght is with Dragon Army
and it’s not going to be anything like this. It’s going to be a lot more
fun. Let’s move out.”

**
*
A broomstick fell out of the sky, approaching terrifyingly fast, and spun
on its end and decelerated so hard you could almost hear the air screaming in protest, and came to a halt directly beside Draco.
It wasn’t dangerous showing-oﬀ. Gregory Goyle simply was that
good and he didn’t waste time.
“Potter’s coming,” Gregory said with no trace of his usual fake drawl.
“They’ve still got all four of their brooms, you want me to take them
out?”
“No,” Draco said sharply. “Fighting over their army gives them too
much of an advantage, they’ll ﬁre on you from the ground and even you
might not be able to dodge it all. Wait until the forces engage.”
Draco had lost four Dragons in exchange for twelve Sunnies. Apparently General Granger actually had been that incredibly stupid, though
she hadn’t been among the attackers, so Draco hadn’t gotten a chance to
taunt her or ask her what in Merlin’s name she had been thinking.
The true battle, they all knew, would be with Harry Potter.
“Prepare yourselves!” roared Draco at his troops. “Stay together with
your mates, act as a unit, ﬁre as soon as the enemy is in range!”
Discipline against Chaos.
It shouldn’t be much of a ﬁght.

**
*
The adrenaline was pumping and pumping into Neville’s blood until he
felt like he could hardly breathe.
*

549 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

“We’re closing in,” said General Potter in a voice barely loud enough
to carry to the whole army. “Time to spread out.”
Neville’s comrades moved away from him. They would still support
each other, but if you clustered together, the enemy would have a much
easier time hitting you; ﬁre aimed at one of your comrades might miss
and get you instead. You would be a lot harder to hit if you spread out
and moved as fast as you could.
The ﬁrst thing General Potter had done, during their training session, was get them to ﬁre on each other when both sides were running
fast, or both stood still and took time to aim, or one was moving and
one was standing still—the reverse charm to the Sleep Hex was simple,
though you weren’t allowed to use it during real battles. General Potter had carefully recorded everything that happened, done some ﬁguring
and ciphering, and then announced that it made more sense for them to
focus, not on slowing down to aim carefully, but on moving fast so they
wouldn’t get hit.
It still bothered Neville a little not to be marching side-by-side with
his comrades, but the scary battlecries they’d learned were already thundering in his head and that made up for a lot.
This time, Neville silently vowed to himself, his voice was absolutely
positively not going to squeak.
“Shields up,” said General Potter, “power to forward deﬂectors.”
“Contego,” murmured the army, and the circular screens sprang into
existence before their heads and chests.
A sharp taste ﬁlled Neville’s mouth. General Potter wouldn’t have
ordered them to cast shields unless they were almost in range. Neville
could see the uniformed shapes of Dragons moving through the dense
screens of trees, and the Dragons would be seeing them as well—
“Attack!” came a cry from the distance, the voice of Draco Malfoy,
and General Potter bellowed, “Charge—”
All the adrenaline in Neville’s blood was unleashed, and his legs took
over, sending him ﬂying faster than he’d ever run before, straight toward
the enemy, knowing without needing to look that all his comrades were
doing the same.
“Blood for the blood god!” screamed Neville. “Skulls for the skull
*

550 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

throne! Ia! Shub-Niggurath! The enemy’s gate is sideways!”
There was a soundless impact as a sleep spell wasted itself against
Neville’s shield. If there’d been other spells ﬁred, they hadn’t hit.
Neville saw the brief look of fear on Wayne Hopkins’s face, as he
stood besides two Gryﬃndors Neville didn’t recognize, and then—
—Neville dropped the Simple Shield and ﬁred at Wayne—
—missed—
—his racing legs went straight past the enemy grouping and toward
another three Dragons, their wands coming up on him, their mouths
opening—
—not even thinking about it, Neville dived down to the forest ﬂoor
just as three voices cried “Somnium!”
It hurt, hard stones and hard twigs digging into Neville as he rolled,
it wasn’t as bad as falling oﬀ his broomstick but he’d still hit the ground
pretty hard, and then Neville, with sudden insight, lay still and closed
his eyes.
“Stop that!” screamed a voice. “Don’t shoot us, we’re Dragons!”
With a ﬂash of glorious satisfaction, Neville realized that he’d managed to get between two groups of Dragons just as one group had ﬁred
on him. Harry had talked about this as a tactic for making the enemy
afraid to ﬁre, but apparently it worked a bit better than that.
And not only that, the Dragons believed they’d gotten him, since
they’d seen Neville fall just as they ﬁred.
Neville counted to twenty inside his head, then opened his eyes a
crack.
The three Dragons were very near him, heads spinning rapidly as
cries of “Somnium!” and “Skulls for the skull throne!” ﬁlled the air around
them. All three had Simple Shields up now.
Neville’s wand was still in his hand, and it didn’t take much eﬀort to
point it at one boy’s boots and whisper “Somnium.”
Neville quickly closed his eyes and relaxed his hand as he heard the
boy fall to the ground.
“Where’d it come from?” screamed Justin Finch-Fletchley’s voice, and
Neville heard rustles on the leafy forest ﬂoor, as of two Dragons spinning
around looking for an enemy.
*

551

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

“Reform ranks!” bellowed Malfoy’s voice. “To me, everyone, don’t let
them scatter you!”
Neville’s ears heard the two Dragons actually jump over his prone
body as they ran oﬀ.
Neville opened his eyes, pushed himself to his feet a bit painfully,
and then pointed his wand and said the new charm that General Potter
had taught them all. They couldn’t do real illusion spells to confuse the
enemy, but even at their age they could—
“Ventriliquo,” whispered Neville, pointing the wand to one side of
Justin and the other boy, and then yelled, “For Cthulhu and glory!”
Justin and the other boy stopped abruptly, turning their shields toward where Neville had moved his battlecry, and that was when multiple cries of “Somnium!” ﬁlled the air and the other boy dropped before
Neville was ﬁnished aiming.
“The last one’s mine!” yelled Neville, and then he started sprinting
straight toward Justin, who’d been mean to him until the older Hufﬂepuﬀs straightened him out. Neville was surrounded by his comrades
and that meant—
“Special attack, Chaotic Leap!” howled Neville as he ran, and felt his
body lighten, then lighten twice again, as his comrades got their wands
turned toward him and quietly cast the Hover Charm, and Neville raised
his left hand and snapped his ﬁngers and then used his legs to push
oﬀ the ground as hard as he could and soared through the air. Sheer
shock painted Justin’s face as Neville went over the other boy’s shield
and pointed his wand down at the form passing beneath him and cried
“Somnium!”
Because he’d felt like it, that was why.
Neville didn’t quite get his feet turned around properly and rather
plowed into the ground as he landed, but two out of three of the other
Chaos Legionnaires had managed to hold their wands on him throughout and he didn’t hit very hard.
And Neville got to his feet, panting. He knew he should be moving,
people were yelling “Somnium!” all over the place—
“I am Neville, the last scion of Longbottom!” screamed Neville to the
sky above, holding his wand pointed straight up as though to challenge
*

552 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

the blazing blue heaven itself, knowing that nothing after this day would
ever be the same again. “Neville of Chaos! Face me if you da—”
(When Neville woke up afterward, he was told that Dragon Army
had taken this as their cue to counterattack.)

**
*
The girl beside Harry slumped to the ground, taking the shot meant for
him, and he could hear Mr. Goyle’s distant gloating laugh as his broomstick blasted past them, cutting the air so hard it should have shattered
in his wake.
“Luminos!” cried one of the boys next to Harry, who hadn’t been able
to rebuild the magical strength fast enough to do it earlier, and Mr. Goyle
dodged it without a pause.
Chaos had only six soldiers left, now, and Dragon Army had two,
and the only problem was that one of those soldiers was invincible, and
the other one was using up three soldiers just to cover him inside his
shield.
They’d lost more soldiers to Mr. Goyle than all the other Dragons
put together, he was weaving and dodging through the air so fast that no
one could hit him, and he could shoot people while he did that.
Harry had thought of all sorts of ways to stop Mr. Goyle but none
of them were safe, even using the Hover Charm to slow him down (it
was a continuous beam and much easier to aim) wouldn’t be safe because
he might fall oﬀ the broomstick, throwing things in his way wouldn’t
be safe, and that was getting harder and harder to remember as Harry’s
blood froze over.
It’s a game. You’re not trying to kill him. Don’t throw away all your
future plans for a game...
Harry could see the pattern, he could see how Mr. Goyle was weaving,
he could see how and when they all needed to ﬁre in order to create
a web of shots that Mr. Goyle wouldn’t be able to dodge, but he just
hadn’t been able to explain it fast enough to his soldiers, they couldn’t
*

553 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

coordinate their shots well enough, and now they didn’t have enough
people left to do it—
I refuse to lose, not like this, not my whole army to one soldier!
Mr. Goyle’s broomstick turned faster than anything should have
been able to turn and started to angle in toward Harry and his surviving troops, he could sense the boy beside him tensing, getting ready to
throw himself in front of his general.
Screw this.
Harry’s wand came up, focusing on Mr. Goyle, Harry’s mind visualized the pattern, and Harry’s lips opened and his voice screamed—
“Luminosluminosluminosluminosluminosluminosluminosluminosluminosluminosluminosluminos—”

**
*
When Harry’s eyes opened again, he found himself resting in a comfortable position with his hands folded over his chest, holding his wand like
a fallen hero.
Slowly, Harry sat up. His magic was aching, a strange sensation but
not an entirely unpleasant one, much like the burn and lethargy that
followed hard physical exercise.
“The general’s awake!” cried a voice, and Harry blinked and focused
in that direction.
Four of his soldiers held their wands on a shimmering prismatic
hemisphere, and Harry realized that the battle wasn’t over. Right... he
hadn’t been hit by a Sleep Hex, just exhausted himself, so when he woke
up, he was still in the game.
Harry suspected he was going to get a lecture from someone-or-other
about not exhausting his magic to the point of unconsciousness over a
children’s game. But he hadn’t hurt Mr. Goyle when he’d lost his temper,
and that was the important thing.
Then Harry’s mind clicked on another implication, and he looked
down at the steel ring on his left hand’s pinky ﬁnger, and almost swore
*

554 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

out loud when he saw that the tiny diamond was missing and there was
a marshmallow lying on the ground near where he’d fallen.
He’d sustained that Transﬁguration for seventeen days, and would
now need to start over.
Could’ve been worse. He could’ve done this fourteen days later, after
Professor McGonagall had approved him to Transﬁgure his father’s rock.
That was one very good lesson to learn the easy way.
Note to self: Always remove ring from ﬁnger before completely exhausting magic.
Harry pushed himself up, making rather hard going of it. Using
up your magic didn’t exhaust your muscles, but dodging around trees
certainly did.
He staggered over to the iridescent hemisphere that contained Draco
Malfoy, who was holding his wand aloft to sustain the shield, and smiling
coldly at Harry.
“Where’s the ﬁfth soldier?” said Harry.
“Um...” said a boy whose name Harry couldn’t remember at the moment. “I ﬁred a Sleep Hex at the shield and it bounced oﬀ and hit Lavender, I mean the angle shouldn’t have been right but it did...”
Draco was smirking inside the shield.
“So let me guess,” Harry said, looking Draco directly in the eyes,
“those neat little trios are the formation used by professional magical
militaries? Made up of trained soldiers who can easily hit moving targets if their own hands are steady, and who can combine their defensive
powers so long as they stay together? Unlike your soldiers?”
The smirk had vanished from Draco’s face, which was now hard and
grim.
“You know,” Harry said lightly, knowing that none of the others
would understand the real message passing between them, “it just goes
to show that you should always question everything you see your role
models doing, and ask why it’s being done, and whether it makes sense
in context for you to do it too. Don’t forget to apply that advice to real
life, by the way. And thanks for the slow-moving clustered targets.”
Because Draco had already gotten that lecture, and, Harry suspected,
discounted it out of suspicion that Harry was trying to shift his loy*

555 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

alties further away from pureblood tradition. Which of course Harry
was. But this example would make an excellent excuse, next Saturday,
to claim that questioning authority was a merely practical technique for
real life. And Harry would also mention the experiments he’d run, ﬁrst
with individuals and then with groups, to check that his ideas about the
importance of speed had actually been correct, by way of hammering
home the point of Draco needing to keep an eye out at all times for
chances to apply the methods in everyday practice.
“You haven’t won yet, General Potter!” snarled Draco. “Maybe we’ll
run out of time, and Professor Quirrell will call it a draw.”
A fair and worrisome point. The war only ended when Professor
Quirrell, in his personal judgment, decided one army had won by practical real-world standards. There was no formal victory condition, Professor Quirrell had explained, because then Harry would ﬁgure out how
to game the rules. Harry had to admit this was a fair cop.
And Harry couldn’t blame Professor Quirrell for not calling an end,
because it was plausible that the last soldier of Dragon Army could take
out all ﬁve survivors of the Chaos Legion.
“All right,” Harry said. “Does anyone know anything about General
Malfoy’s shield spell?”
It developed that Draco’s shield was a version of the standard Protego
which had several disadvantages, the most important of which was that
the shield couldn’t move with the caster.
The upside—or from Harry’s perspective, downside—was that it was
easier to learn, easier to cast, and much easier to sustain for long times.
They would need to hammer the shield with attack spells in order to
bring it down.
And Draco could apparently exert some control over the angle of
reﬂection at which the spells would bounce oﬀ.
The thought occurred to Harry that they could use Wingardium
Leviosa to pile up heavy rocks on the shield until Draco couldn’t sustain it against the pressure... but then the rocks might fall in afterward
and hit Draco, and injuring the enemy general for real was not among
today’s goals.
“So,” said Harry. “Are there such things as specialized shield-piercing
*

556 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

spells?”
There were.
Harry asked if any of his soldiers knew them.
No one did.
Draco was smirking again, inside his shield.
Harry asked if there was any sort of attack spell that wouldn’t
bounce.
Lightning bolts, it seemed, were usually absorbed by shields instead
of bouncing oﬀ them.
...No one knew how to cast any sort of lightning-related spell.
Draco sniggered.
Harry sighed.
He quite deliberately laid his wand on the ground.
And Harry announced, with some weariness in his voice, that he
would just go ahead and take down the shield himself, using some
method that would remain mysterious; and everyone else was to ﬁre
on Draco as soon as his shield went down.
The Chaos Legionnaires looked nervous.
Draco looked calm, which was to say, controlled.
A thin, folded blanket came out of Harry’s pouch.
Harry sat down next to the shimmering shield, and pulled the blanket over his head so no one could see what he did—except Draco, of
course.
From Harry’s pouch came a car battery and a set of jumper cables.
...it wasn’t like he’d been about to leave the Muggle world to start a
new era of magical research, and not take along any way of generating
electricity.
Shortly after, the Chaos Legionnaires heard the sound of ﬁngers
snapping, followed by a crackling noise from beneath the blanket. The
shield started glowing more brightly, and Harry’s voice said, “Don’t be
distracted please, eyes on General Malfoy.”
The strain was showing on Draco’s face, along with the fury and
annoyance and frustration.
Harry smiled up at him, and mouthed, Tell you later.
And that was when a spiral of green energy shot out of the forest
*

557 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

and smashed into Draco’s shield, which shrieked like pieces of sharp
glass being rubbed together, and Draco staggered.
In sudden, frantic panic, Harry took the jumper cables oﬀ the battery
and fed them into the pouch, then he fed the battery itself into the pouch,
and then he tore oﬀ the blanket and grabbed his wand and stood up.
All of his soldiers were still there and glancing around frantically.
“Contego,” Harry said, and his soldiers followed suit, but Harry
didn’t even know which direction the shield ought to be pointing in.
“Did anyone see where that came from?” Shaken heads. “And General
Malfoy, would you mind telling me if you got General Granger?”
“Why yes,” Draco said acidly, “I mind.”
Oh, hell.
Harry’s mind began calculating, Draco inside the shield, Draco worn
out now to some degree, Harry worn out too, Hermione in the woods
who-knew-where, Harry and four other Chaotics left...
“You know, General Granger,” Harry said out loud, “you really
should’ve waited to attack until after I’d fought General Malfoy. You
might’ve been able to get all the survivors.”
From somewhere came a girl’s high-pitched laughter.
Harry froze.
That wasn’t Hermione.
And that was when the dreadful, eerie, cheerful chant began to rise,
coming from all around them.
“Don’t be frightened, don’t be sad,
We’ll only hurt you if you’re bad...”
“Granger cheated!” burst out Draco inside the shield. “She woke up
her soldiers! Why doesn’t Professor Quirrell—”
“Let me guess,” Harry said, the sickness already churning in his stomach. He really hated losing. “It was a very easy battle, right? They
dropped like ﬂies?”
“Yes,” Draco said. “We got them all on the ﬁrst shot—”
The look of horriﬁed realization spread from Draco to the Chaos
Legionnaires.
*

558 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS I

*
*

*

“No,” Harry said, “we didn’t.”
Camouﬂaged forms were appearing from among the trees.
“Allies?” Harry said.
“Allies,” Draco said.
“Good,” said General Granger’s voice, and a spiral of green energy
blazed out of the woods and shattered Draco’s shield to splinters.

**
*
General Granger surveyed the battleﬁeld with a deﬁnite feeling of satisfaction. She was down to nine Sunshine Soldiers, but that was probably
enough to handle the last survivor of the enemy forces, especially when
Parvati and Anthony and Ernie were already holding their wands on
General Potter, whom she’d ordered taken alive (well, conscious).
It was Bad, she knew, but she’d really really really wanted to gloat.
“There’s a trick, isn’t there?” said Harry, the strain showing in his
voice. “There has to be some trick. You can’t just turn into a perfect
general. Not on top of everything else. You’re not that Slytherin! You
don’t write creepy poetry! No one’s that good at everything!”
General Granger glanced around at her Sunshine Soldiers, and then
looked back at Harry. Everyone was probably watching this on the
screens outside.
And General Granger said, “I can do anything if I study hard
enough.”
“Oh now that’s just bu—”
“Somnium.”
Harry slumped to the ground in mid-sentence.
“Sunshine wins,” intoned the huge voice of Professor Quirrell, seeming to come from everywhere and nowhere.
“Niceness has triumphed!” cried General Granger.
“Hooray!” shouted the Sunshine Soldiers. Even the Gryﬃndor boys
said it, and they said it with pride.
“And what’s the moral of today’s battle?” said General Granger.
“We can do anything if we study hard enough!”
*

559 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y

*
*

*

And the survivors of the Sunshine Regiment marched oﬀ toward the
victory ﬁeld, singing their marching song as they went:
Don’t be frightened, don’t be sad,
We’ll only hurt you if you’re bad,
And send you to a home that’s true,
With new friends to watch over you,
Be sure to tell them you were sent
By Granger’s Sunshine Regiment!

*

560 *

CHAPTER

THIRT Y-ONE

WORKING IN GROUPS,
PART II
Aftermaths:
arry paced backward and forward in his general’s oﬃce, which
made a wonderful room for pacing, it didn’t have any other uses
as far as he could tell.
How?
How?
Hermione shouldn’t have won that battle! Not on her ﬁrst try, not
when she wasn’t at all violent by her nature, automatically being a great
military commander on top of everything else was too much even for
her.
Had she read about the tactic in a military history book? But it
hadn’t been just that one tactic, she’d had her forces perfectly positioned
to block any retreat, her troops had been better coordinated than his or
Draco’s...
Had Professor Quirrell broken his promise not to help her? Had he
given her the diary of General Tacticus or something?
Harry was missing something here, something really important, and
his mind went around and around in circles, and he still couldn’t ﬁgure
it out.
Finally Harry sighed. He wasn’t getting anywhere on this, and he
had to go learn the Breaking Drill Hex from Hermione or someone
before the next battle—Professor Quirrell had explained to Harry, his
voice amused but with a sharp undertone of warning, that “no magical

H

*

561

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-ONE

*
*

*

items except the ones I give you” included Muggle technology no matter
how much that wasn’t magic. Plus Harry also needed to ﬁgure out how
to bring down Mr. Goyle next time...
Battles counted for a lot of Quirrell points if you were a general, and
Harry needed to get cracking if he wanted to win Professor Quirrell’s
Christmas wish.

**
*
In his private room at Slytherin, Draco Malfoy stared oﬀ into space, as
though the wall in front of his desk was the most fascinating surface in
the world.
How?
How?
In retrospect it had been an obvious sort of idea as cunning plots
went, but Granger wasn’t supposed to be cunning! She’d been too much
of a Huﬄepuﬀ to use a Simple Strike Hex! Had Professor Quirrell been
advising her despite his promise, or...
And then Draco ﬁnally did what he should have done much earlier.
What he should have done after the ﬁrst time he met with Granger.
What Harry Potter had told him to do, trained him to do, and yet
Harry had also warned Draco that it would take time to make his brain
realize that the methods applied to real life, and Draco hadn’t understood
that until today. He could have avoided every single one of his mistakes
if he’d just applied the things Harry had already told him—
Draco said out loud, “I notice that I am confused.”
Your strength as a rationalist is your ability to be more confused by ﬁction
than by reality...
Draco was confused.
Therefore, something he believed was ﬁction.
Granger should not have been able to do all that.
Therefore, she probably hadn’t.
I promise not to help General Granger in any way that the two of you
don’t know about.
*

562 *

**
*

WORKING IN GROUPS II

*
*

*

With sudden horriﬁed realization, Draco swept papers out of the
way, hunting through the mess on his desk, until he found it.
And there it was.
Right in the list of people and equipment assigned to each of the three
armies.
Curse Professor Quirrell!
Draco had read it and he still hadn’t seen it—

**
*
The afternoon sunlight poured down into the oﬃce of the Sunshine Regiment, illuminating General Granger in her chair as though she glowed
with a golden aura.
“How long do you think it will take Malfoy to ﬁgure it out?” said
General Granger.
“Not long,” said Colonel Blaise Zabini. “He may have already. How
long will it take Potter to ﬁgure it out?”
“Forever,” said General Granger, “unless Malfoy tells him, or one of
his own soldiers realizes. Harry Potter just doesn’t think like that.”
“Really?” said Captain Ernie Macmillan, looking up from one of
the corner tables where he was being crushed at chess by Captain Ron
Weasley. (They’d brought back all the other chairs after Malfoy had left,
of course.) “I mean it seems kind of obvious to me. Who would try to
come up with all the ideas just by themselves?”
“Harry,” said Hermione, at exactly the same time Zabini said, “Malfoy.”
“Malfoy thinks he’s way better than everyone else,” said Zabini.
“And Harry... doesn’t really see most other people like that,” said
Hermione.
It was kind of sad, actually. Harry had grown up very, very alone. It
wasn’t that he went around thinking in words that only geniuses had a
right to exist. It just wouldn’t occur to him that anyone in Hermione’s
army besides Hermione could have any good ideas.
*

563 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-ONE

*
*

*

“Anyhow,” Hermione said. “Captains Goldstein and Weasley,
you’re on duty for thinking up strategic ideas for our next battle. Captains Macmillan and Susan—sorry, I mean Macmillan and Bones—try to
come up with some tactics we can use, also any training you think we
should try. Oh, and congratulations on your marching song, Captain
Goldstein, I think it was a big plus for esprit de corps.”
“What’re you doing?” said Susan. “And Colonel Zabini?”
Hermione stood up out of her chair, stretching. “I’ll try to ﬁgure out
what Harry Potter is thinking and Colonel Zabini will try to ﬁgure out
what Draco Malfoy might do, and both of us will join you again after
we come up with something. I’m going to walk while I think. Zabini,
you want to come along?”
“Yes, General,” said Zabini stiﬄy.
It hadn’t been meant as an order. Hermione sighed to herself a little. This was going to take some getting used to, and although Zabini’s
ﬁrst idea had certainly worked, she wasn’t quite sure that Professor Quirrell’s quote mixture of positive and negative incentives unquote would
be enough to keep the Slytherin fully on her side until December when
traitors would be allowed for the ﬁrst time...
She still had no idea what she was going to do with Professor Quirrell’s Christmas wish, either. Maybe she’d just ask Mandy if she wanted
anything, when the time came around.

*

564 *

CHAPTER

THIRT Y-TWO

INTERLUDE:
PERSONAL FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT
“But Headmaster,” Harry argued, some of his desperation leaking into
his voice, “leaving all of my assets in one undiversiﬁed vault full of gold
coins—it’s crazy, Headmaster! It’s like, I don’t know, doing Transﬁguration experiments without consulting a recognized authority! You just
don’t do that with money!”
From the lined face of the old wizard—underneath a festive holiday
hat like a catastrophic automobile collision between cars of green and
red cloth—a grave, sad look peered out at Harry.
“I’m sorry, Harry,” said Dumbledore, “and I do apologize, but allowing you control over your own ﬁnances would give you far too much
independence of action.”
Harry’s mouth opened and no sound came out. He was, literally,
speechless.
“I will permit you to withdraw ﬁve Galleons for Christmas presents,”
said Dumbledore, “which is more than any boy your age should spend,
but poses no threat, I think—”
“I can’t believe you just said that!” the words burst out of Harry’s
mouth. “You admit to being that manipulative?”
“Manipulative?” said the old wizard, smiling slightly. “No, manipulative would be if I did not admit it, or if I had some deeper motive
behind the obvious. This is quite straightforward, Harry. You are not
*

565 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-TWO

*
*

*

yet ready to play the game, and it would be foolish to allow you thousands of Galleons with which to upset the gameboard.”

**
*
The bright hustle and bustle of Diagon Alley had increased by a hundredfold and redoubled as Christmas approached, with all the shops enshrouded in brilliant sorceries that ﬂashed and sparkled as though the
season’s spirit was about to blaze out of control and turn the whole area
into a cheerful holiday crater. The streets were so crowded with witches
and wizards in festive and loud clothing that your eyes were assaulted
almost as severely as your ears; and it was clear, from the bewildering
variety of the shoppers, that Diagon Alley was considered an international attraction. There were witches wrapped in giant swathes of cloth
like toweled mummies, and wizards in formal top hats and bath-robes,
and young children barely past toddling age who were decorated with
lights that blazed almost as bright as the shops themselves, as their parents took them hand in hand through that magic wonderland and let
them shriek to their heart’s content. It was the season to be merry.
And in the midst of all that light and cheer, a note of blackest night; a
cold, dark atmosphere that cleared a few precious paces of distance even
in the midst of all that crush.
“No,” said Professor Quirrell, with a look of grim revulsion, like
he’d just bitten into food that not only tasted horrible but was morally
repugnant to boot. It was the sort of grim face an ordinary person might
make after biting into a meat pie, and discovering that it was rotten and
had been made from kittens.
“Oh, come on,” Harry said. “You must have some ideas.”
“Mr. Potter,” Professor Quirrell said, his lips set in a thin line, “I
agreed to act as your adult guardian on this expedition. I did not agree to
advise you on your choice of presents. I don’t do Christmas, Mr. Potter.”
“How about Newtonmas?” Harry said brightly. “Isaac Newton actually was born on December 25th, unlike some other historical ﬁgures
I could name.”
*

566 *

**
*

INTERLUDE:
PERSONAL FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

*
*

*

This failed to impress Professor Quirrell.
“Look,” said Harry, “I’m sorry, but I’ve got to do something special
for Fred and George and I’ve got no idea of my options.”
Professor Quirrell made a thoughtful humming sound. “You could
ask which family members they most dislike, and then hire an assassin.
I know someone from a certain government-in-exile who is quite competent, and he would give you a discount on multiple Weasleys.”
“This Christmas,” Harry said, dropping his voice into a lower register, “give your friends the gift... of death.”
That made Professor Quirrell smile. It went all the way to his eyes.
“Well,” said Harry, “at least you didn’t suggest getting them a pet
rat—” Harry’s mouth snapped shut, and he was regretting the words
almost as soon as they were out of his mouth.
“Pardon me?” said Professor Quirrell.
“Nothing,” Harry said at once, “long dumb story.” And telling it
seemed wrong somehow, maybe because Harry was afraid Professor
Quirrell would have laughed even if Bill Weasley hadn’t been cured and
everything put back to right...
And where had Professor Quirrell been that he’d never heard the
story? Harry had gotten the impression that everyone in magical Britain
knew.
“Look,” said Harry, “I’m trying to solidify their loyalty to me, you
know? Make the Weasley twins my minions? Like the old saying goes:
A friend isn’t someone you use once and then throw away, a friend is
someone you use over and over again. Fred and George are two of the
most useful friends I have in Hogwarts, Professor Quirrell, and I plan
to use them over and over again. So if you’d help me be Slytherin here,
and suggest something they might be very grateful for...” Harry’s voice
trailed oﬀ invitingly.
You just had to pitch these things the right way.
They walked on for a good way before Professor Quirrell spoke
again, his voice practically dripping with distaste. “The Weasley twins
are using secondhand wands, Mr. Potter. They would be reminded of
your generosity with every Charm they cast.”
Harry clapped his hands together in involuntary excitement. Just
*

567 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-TWO

*
*

*

put the money on account at Ollivander’s, and tell Mr. Ollivander to
never refund it—no, better yet, to send it to Lucius Malfoy if the Weasley
twins didn’t show up before the start of their next school year. “That’s
brilliant, Professor!”
Professor Quirrell did not look like he appreciated the compliment.
“I suppose I can tolerate Christmas in that spirit, Mr. Potter, though only
barely.” Then he smiled slightly. “Of course that will cost you fourteen
Galleons, and you only have ﬁve.”
“Five Galleons,” Harry said, with a sniﬀ of outrage. “Just who does
the Headmaster think he’s dealing with, anyway?”
“I think,” said Professor Quirrell, “that it simply did not occur to
him to fear the consequences if you turned your ingenuity to the task
of obtaining funds. Though you were wise to lose, rather than making
it an explicit threat. Out of curiosity, Mr. Potter, what would you have
done if I hadn’t turned away in boredom while you, in a ﬁt of childish
pique, counted out ﬁve Galleons worth of Knuts?”
“Well, the easiest way would’ve been to borrow money from Draco
Malfoy,” said Harry.
Professor Quirrell chuckled brieﬂy. “Seriously, Mr. Potter.”
Duly noted. “Probably I’d have done a few celebrity appearances. I
wouldn’t resort to anything economically disruptive just for spending
money.” Harry had checked, and he would be allowed to keep the TimeTurner while he went home for the holidays, so that his sleep cycle didn’t
start to rotate. But then it was also possible that someone kept an eye
out for magical day traders. The gold and silver trick would’ve taken
work on the Muggle end, and seed funding, and the goblins might’ve
gotten suspicious after the ﬁrst cycle. And starting a real bank would
be a lot of work... Harry hadn’t quite worked out any money-making
methods that were fast and certain and safe, so he’d been very glad when
Professor Quirrell had turned out to be so easily fooled.
“I do hope those ﬁve Galleons will be enough to last, since you
counted them so carefully,” said Professor Quirrell. “I doubt the Headmaster shall be so eager to entrust me with your vault key a second time,
once he discovers I’ve been tricked.”
“I’m sure you did your best,” Harry said with deep gratitude.
*

568 *

**
*

INTERLUDE:
PERSONAL FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

*
*

*

“Do you need any assistance ﬁnding a safe place to store all those
Knuts, Mr. Potter?”
“Well, sort of,” said Harry. “Do you know of any good investment
opportunities, Professor Quirrell?”
And the two of them walked on, in their tiny sphere of silence and
isolation, through the brilliant and bustling crowds; and if you looked
carefully, you would see that where they went, leafy boughs faded, and
ﬂowers withered, and children’s toys that played cheerful bells changed
to lower and more ominous notes.
Harry did notice, but he didn’t say anything, just smiled a little to
himself.
Everyone had their own way of celebrating the holidays, and the
Grinch was as much a part of Christmas as Santa.

*

569 *

CHAPTER

THIRT Y-THREE

COORDINATION
PROBLEMS, PART I
he terrifying part was how fast the whole thing had spiraled out of
control.
“Albus,” Minerva said, not even trying to keep the worry out of her
voice as the two of them entered the Great Hall, “something has to be
done.”
The atmosphere at Hogwarts before Yuletide was usually bright and
cheerful. The Great Hall had already been decorated in green and red,
after a Slytherin and a Gryﬃndor whose Yule wedding had become a
symbol of friendship transcending Houses and allegiances, a tradition
almost as ancient as Hogwarts itself and which had even spread to Muggle countries.
Now the students eating dinner were glancing nervously over their
shoulders, or sending vicious glares at other tables, or at some tables
arguing heatedly. You could have described the atmosphere as tense,
perhaps, but the phrase coming to Minerva’s mind was ﬁfth degree of
caution.
Take a school, into four Houses divided...
Now into each year, add three armies at war.
And the partisanship of Dragon and Sunshine and Chaos had spread
beyond the ﬁrst-years; they had become the armies for those who had no
armies. Students were wearing armbands with insignia of ﬁre or smile or
upraised hand, and hexing each other in the corridors. All three ﬁrst-year
generals had told them to stop—even Draco Malfoy had heard her out
and then nodded grimly—but their supposed followers hadn’t listened.

T

*

571

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Dumbledore gazed out at the tables with a distant look. “In every
city,” the old wizard quoted softly, “the population has been divided for a
long time past into the Blue and the Green factions... And they ﬁght against
their opponents knowing not for what end they imperil themselves... So there
grows up in them against their fellow men a hostility which has no cause, and
at no time does it cease or disappear, for it gives place neither to the ties of
marriage nor of relationship nor of friendship, and the case is the same even
though those who diﬀer with respect to these colours be brothers or any other
kin. I, for my part, am unable to call this anything except a disease of the
soul...”
“I’m sorry,” said Minerva, “I don’t—”
“Procopius,” said Dumbledore. “They took their chariot-racing very
seriously, in the Roman Empire. Yes, Minerva, I agree that something
must be done.”
“Soon,” Minerva said, her voice lowering even further. “Albus, I
think it must be done before Saturday.”
On Sunday, most students would leave Hogwarts to stay the holiday
with their families; Saturday, then, was the ﬁnal battle of the three ﬁrstyear armies that would determine the awarding of Professor Quirrell’s
thrice-cursed Christmas wish.
Dumbledore glanced over at her, studying her gravely. “You fear that
the explosion will come then, and someone will be hurt.”
Minerva nodded.
“And that Professor Quirrell will be blamed.”
Minerva nodded again, her face tight. She had long since become
wise in the ways that Defense Professors were ﬁred. “Albus,” Minerva
said, “we cannot lose Professor Quirrell now, we cannot! If he but stays
through January our ﬁfth-years will pass their owls, if he stays through
March our seventh-years will pass their newts, he is remedying years
of neglect in months, a whole generation will grow up able to defend
themselves in spite of the Dark Lord’s curse—you must stop the battle,
Albus! Ban the armies now!”
“I am not sure the Defense Professor would take that kindly,” said
Dumbledore, glancing over toward the Head Table where Quirrell was
drooling into his soup. “He did seem most attached to his armies, though
*

572 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

when I agreed I thought there would be four in each year.” The old wizard sighed. “A clever man, probably with the best of intentions; but
perhaps not clever enough, I fear. And to ban the armies might also
trigger the explosion.”
“But then Albus, what will you do?”
The old wizard favored her with a benign smile. “Why, I shall plot,
of course. It’s the new fashion in Hogwarts.”
And they had come too close to the Head Table for Minerva to say
anything more.

**
*
The terrifying part was how fast the whole thing had spiraled out of
control.
The ﬁrst battle in December had been... messy, or so Draco had
heard.
The second battle had been deranged.
And the next one would be worse, unless the three of them together
succeeded in their last desperate attempt to stop it.
“Professor Quirrell, this is insanity,” Draco said ﬂatly. “This isn’t
Slytherin any more, it’s just...” Draco was at a loss for words. He waved
his hands helplessly. “You can’t possibly do any real plots with all this
stuﬀ going on. Last battle, one of my soldiers faked his own suicide.
We have Huﬄepuﬀs trying to plot, and they think they can, but they
can’t. Things just happen at random now, it doesn’t have anything to do
with who’s cleverest, or which army ﬁghts best, it’s...” He couldn’t even
describe it.
“I agree with Mr. Malfoy,” said Granger in the tones of someone
who hadn’t ever expected to hear herself saying those words. “Allowing
traitors isn’t working, Professor Quirrell.”
Draco had tried forbidding anyone in his army to plot except him,
and that had just driven the plots underground, no one wanted to be
left out when the soldiers in other armies got to plot. After miserably
losing their last battle, he’d ﬁnally given in and revoked his decree; but
*

573 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

by then his soldiers had already started setting their own personal plans
in motion, without any sort of central coordination.
After being told all the plans, or what his soldiers claimed were their
plans, Draco had tried to sketch a plot to win the ﬁnal battle. It had
required considerably more than three diﬀerent things to go right, and
Draco had used Incendio on the paper and Everto to vanish the ashes,
because if Father had seen it he would have been disowned.
Professor Quirrell’s eyelids were half-closed, his chin resting on his
hands as he leaned forward onto his desk. “And you, Mr. Potter?” said
the Defense Professor. “Are you likewise in agreement?”
“All we’d need to do is shoot Franz Ferdinand and we could start
World War One,” said Harry. “It’s gone to complete chaos. I’m all for
it.”
“Harry!” said Draco in utter shock.
He didn’t even realize until a second later that he’d said it at exactly
the same time, and in exactly the same tone of indignation, as Granger.
Granger shot him a startled glance, and Draco carefully kept his face
neutral. Oops.
“That’s right!” said Harry. “I’m betraying you! Both of you! Again!
Ha ha!”
Professor Quirrell was smiling thinly, though his eyes were still halfclosed. “And why is that, Mr. Potter?”
“Because I think I can cope with the chaos better than Miss Granger
or Mr. Malfoy,” said the traitor. “Our war is a zero-sum game, and it
doesn’t matter whether it’s easy or hard in an absolute sense, only who
does better or worse.”
Harry Potter was learning far too fast.
Professor Quirrell’s eyes moved beneath their lids to regard Draco,
and then Granger. “In truth, Mr. Malfoy, Miss Granger, I simply could
not live with myself if I shut down the grand debacle before its climax.
One of your soldiers has even become a quadruple agent.”
“Quadruple?” said Granger. “But there’s only three sides in the war!”
“Yes,” said Professor Quirrell, “you’d think that, wouldn’t you. I am
not sure that there has ever in history been a quadruple agent, or any
army with such a high fraction of real and pretended traitors. We are
*

574

*

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

exploring new realms, Miss Granger, and we cannot turn back now.”
Draco left the Defense Professor’s oﬃce with his teeth gritting hard
against each other, and Granger looking even more annoyed beside him.
“I can’t believe you did that, Harry!” said Granger.
“Sorry,” Harry said, not sounding sorry at all, his lips curved up in
a merry smile of evil. “Remember, Hermione, it is just a game, and why
should generals like us be the only ones who get to plot? And besides,
what are the two of you going to do about it? Team up against me?”
Draco traded glances with Granger, knowing that his own face was
as tight as hers. Harry had been relying, more and more openly and
gloatingly, on Draco’s refusal to make common cause with a mudblood
girl; and Draco was beginning to get sick of having that used against
him. If this kept up much longer he was going to ally with Granger just
to crush Harry Potter, and see how much the son of a mudblood liked
that.

**
*
The terrifying part was how fast the whole thing had spiraled out of
control.
Hermione stared at the parchment Zabini had given her, feeling utterly and completely helpless.
There were names, and lines connecting the names to other names,
and some of the lines were in diﬀerent colors and...
“Tell me,” said General Granger, “is there anyone in my army who
isn’t a spy?”
The two of them weren’t in the oﬃce but in another, deserted classroom, and they were alone; because, Colonel Zabini had said, it was
now nearly certain that at least one of the captains was a traitor. Probably Captain Goldstein, but Zabini didn’t know for sure.
Her question had put an ironic smile on the young Slytherin’s face.
Blaise Zabini always seemed a little disdainful of her, but he didn’t seem
to actively dislike her; nothing like the derision he held for Draco Malfoy, or the resentment he had developed for Harry Potter. She had worried at ﬁrst about Zabini betraying her, but the boy seemed desperate to
*

575 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

show that the other two generals were no better than him; and Hermione thought that while Zabini would probably be happy to sell her out
to anyone else, he’d never let Malfoy or Harry win.
“Most of your soldiers are still loyal to you, I’m pretty sure,” said
Zabini. “It’s just that no one wants to be left out of the fun.” The scornful look on the Slytherin’s face made it clear what he thought of people
who didn’t take plotting seriously. “So they think they can be double
agents and secretly work for our side while pretending to betray us.”
“And that would also go for anyone in the other armies who says they
want to be our spy,” Hermione said carefully.
The young Slytherin shrugged. “I think I did a good job of telling
which ones really want to sell out Malfoy, I’m not sure anyone really
wants to sell out Potter to you. But Nott is a sure bet for betraying
Potter to Malfoy and since I had Entwhistle approach him supposedly
on behalf of Malfoy and Entwhistle really reports to us, that’s almost as
good—”
Hermione closed her eyes for a moment. “We’re going to lose, aren’t
we?”
“Look,” Zabini said patiently, “You’re in the lead right now on Quirrell points. We just have to not lose this last battle completely and you’ll
have enough Quirrell points to win the Christmas wish.”
Professor Quirrell had announced that the ﬁnal battle would operate on a formal scoring system, which he’d been asked to do to avoid
recriminations afterward. Each time you shot someone, the general of
your army got two Quirrell points. A gong would ring through the
battle area (they didn’t know yet where they would be ﬁghting, though
Hermione was hoping for the forest again, where Sunshine did well) and
its pitch would tell which army had won the points. And if anyone was
faking being hit, the gong would ring out anyway, and then a double
gong would ring later, after no ﬁxed time, to hail the retraction. And if
you called the name of an army, cried “For Sunshine!” or “For Chaos!”
or “For Dragon!”, it switched your allegiance to that army...
Even Hermione had been able to see the ﬂaw in that set of rules. But
Professor Quirrell had gone on to announce that if you’d been originally
assigned to Sunshine, nobody could shoot you in the name of Sunshine—
*

576 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

or rather, they could, but then Sunshine lost a single Quirrell point,
symbolized by a triple gong. That prevented you from shooting your
own soldiers for points, and discouraged suiciding before the enemy got
you, but you could still shoot spies if you had to.
Right now, Hermione had two hundred and forty-four Quirrell
points, and Malfoy had two hundred and nineteen, and Harry had two
hundred and twenty-one; and there were twenty-four soldiers in each
army.
“So we ﬁght carefully,” Hermione said, “and just try not to lose too
badly.”
“No,” said Zabini. The young Slytherin’s face was now serious. “The
problem is, Malfoy and Potter both know that their only way to win is
to combine and crush us, then ﬁght it out on their own. So here’s what
I think we should do—”
Hermione left the classroom in something of a daze. Zabini’s plan
hadn’t been the obvious one, it had been strange and complicated and
layered and the sort of thing she would’ve expected Harry to come up
with, not Zabini. It felt wrong just for her to be able to understand a
plan like that. Young girls shouldn’t be able to understand plans like
that. The Hat would’ve Sorted her into Slytherin, if it’d seen that she
could understand plans like that...

**
*
The awesome thing was how fast he’d been able to escalate the chaos
once he started doing it deliberately.
Harry sat in his oﬃce; he’d been given the authority to order furniture from the house elves, so he’d ordered a throne, and curtains in a
black and crimson pattern. Scarlet light like blood, mixed with shadow,
poured over the ﬂoor.
Something in Harry felt like he’d ﬁnally come home.
Before him stood the four Lieutenants of Chaos, his most trusted
minions, one of whom was a traitor.
This. This was what life should be like.
*

577 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

“We are gathered,” said Harry.
“Let Chaos reign,” chorused his four Lieutenants.
“My hovercraft is full of eels,” said Harry.
“I will not buy this record, it is scratched,” chorused his four Lieutenants.
“All mimsy were the borogroves.”
“And the mome raths outgrabe!”
That concluded the formalities.
“How goes the confusion?” Harry said in a dry whisper like Emperor
Palpatine.
“It goes well, General Chaos,” said Neville in the tone he always used
for military matters, a tone so deep that the boy often had to stop and
cough. The Chaotic Lieutenant was neatly dressed in his black school
robes, trimmed in the yellow of Huﬄepuﬀ House, and his hair was
parted and combed in the usual look for an earnest young boy. Harry
had liked the incongruity better than any of the cloaks they’d tried.
“Our Legionnaires have begun ﬁve new plots since yesterday evening.”
Harry smiled evilly. “Do any of them have a chance of working?”
“I don’t think so,” said Neville of Chaos. “Here’s the report.”
“Excellent,” said Harry, and laughed chillingly as he took the parchment from Neville’s hand, trying his best to make it sound like he was
choking on dust. That brought the total to sixty.
Let Draco try to handle that. Let him try.
And as for Blaise Zabini...
Harry laughed again, and this time it didn’t even take an eﬀort to
sound evil. He really needed to borrow someone’s pet Kneazle for his
staﬀ meetings, so he’d have a cat to stroke while he did this.
“Can the Legion stop making plots now?” said Finnigan of Chaos.
“I mean, don’t we have enough already—”
“No,” Harry said ﬂatly. “We can never have enough plots.”
Professor Quirrell had put it perfectly. They were pushing the
boundaries further, perhaps, then they had ever been pushed; and Harry
wouldn’t have been able to live with himself if he’d turned back now.
There came a knock at the door.
“That will be the Dragon General,” Harry said, smiling with evil
*

578 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

prescience. “He arrives precisely as I expected. Do show him in, and
yourselves out.”
And the four Lieutenants of Chaos shuﬄed out, casting dark looks
at Draco as the enemy general entered into Harry’s secret lair.
If he wasn’t allowed to do this when he was older, Harry was just
going to stay eleven forever.

**
*
The sun was dripping through the red curtains, sending rays of blood
dancing across the ﬂoor from behind Harry Potter’s grownup-sized cushioned chair, which he had covered in gold and silver glitter and insisted
on referring to as his throne.
(Draco was beginning to feel a lot more conﬁdent that he’d done the
right thing in deciding to overthrow Harry Potter before he could take
over the world. Draco couldn’t even imagine what it would be like to
live under his rule.)
“Good evening, Dragon General,” said Harry Potter in a chill whisper. “You have arrived just as I expected.”
This was not surprising, considering that Draco and Harry had
agreed on the meeting time in advance.
And it also wasn’t evening, but by now Draco knew better than to
say anything.
“General Potter,” Draco said with as much dignity as he could manage, “you know that our two armies have to work together for either of
us to win Professor Quirrell’s wish, right?”
“Yesss,” hissed Harry, like the boy thought he was a Parselmouth.
“We must cooperate to destroy Sunshine, and only then ﬁght it out between us. But if one of us betrays the other earlier on, that one could
gain an advantage in the later ﬁght. And the Sunshine General, who
knows all this, will try to trick each of us into thinking the other has betrayed them. And you and I, who know that, will be tempted to betray
the other and pretend that it is Granger’s trickery. And Granger knows
that, as well.”
*

579 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Draco nodded. That much was obvious. “And... both of us only want
to win, and there’s no one else who’ll punish either of us if we defect...”
“Precisely,” said Harry Potter, his face now turning serious. “We are
faced with a true Prisoner’s Dilemma.”
The Prisoner’s Dilemma, according to Harry’s teachings, ran thus:
Two prisoners had been locked in separate cells. There was evidence
against each prisoner, but only minor evidence, enough for a prison sentence of two years piece. Each prisoner could opt to defect, betray the
other, testify against them in court; and this would take one year oﬀ
their own prison sentence, but add two years to the other’s. Or a prisoner could cooperate, staying silent. So if both prisoners defected, each
testifying against the other, they would serve three years apiece; if both
cooperated, or stayed silent, they would serve two years each; but if one
defected and the other cooperated, the defector would serve a single year,
and the cooperator would serve four.
And both prisoners had to make their decision without knowing the
other one’s choice, and neither would be given a chance to change their
decision afterward.
Draco had observed that if the two prisoners had been Death Eaters
during the Wizarding War, the Dark Lord would have killed any traitors.
Harry had nodded and said that was one way to resolve the Prisoner’s
Dilemma—and in fact both Death Eaters would want there to be a Dark
Lord for exactly that reason.
(Draco had asked Harry to stop and let him to think about this for
a while before they continued. It had explained a lot about why Father
and his friends had agreed to serve under a Dark Lord who often wasn’t
nice to them...)
In fact, Harry had said, this was pretty much the reason why people
had governments—you might be better oﬀ if you stole from someone
else, just like each prisoner would be individually better oﬀ if they defected in the Prisoner’s Dilemma. But if everyone thought like that, the
country would fall into chaos and everyone would be worse oﬀ, like
what would happen if both prisoners defected. So people let themselves
be ruled by governments, just like the Death Eaters had let themselves
be ruled by the Dark Lord.
*

580 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

(Draco had asked Harry to stop again. Draco had always taken for
granted that ambitious wizards put themselves in power because they
wanted to rule, and people let themselves be ruled because they were
scared little Huﬄepuﬀs. And this, on reﬂection, still seemed true; but
Harry’s perspective was fascinating even if it was wrong.)
But, Harry had continued afterward, the fear of a third party punishing you was not the only possible reason to cooperate in the Prisoner’s
Dilemma.
Suppose, Harry had said, you were playing the game against a magically produced identical copy of yourself.
Draco had said that if there were two Dracos, of course neither Draco
would want anything bad to happen to the other one, not to mention
that no Malfoy would let himself become known as a traitor.
Harry had nodded again, and said that this was yet another solution to the Prisoner’s Dilemma—people might cooperate because they
cared about each other, or because they had senses of honor, or because
they wanted to preserve their reputation. Indeed, Harry had said, it
was rather diﬃcult to construct a true Prisoner’s Dilemma—in real life,
people usually cared about the other person, or their honor or their reputation or a Dark Lord’s punishment or something besides the prison
sentences. But suppose the copy had been of someone completely selfish—
(Pansy Parkinson had been the example they’d used)
—so each Pansy only cared what happened to her and not to the other
Pansy.
Given that this was all Pansy cared about... and that there was no
Dark Lord... and Pansy wasn’t worried about her reputation... and Pansy
either had no sense of honor or didn’t consider herself obligated to the
other prisoner... then would the rational thing be for Pansy to cooperate,
or defect?
Some people, Harry said, claimed that the rational thing to do was
for Pansy to defect against her copy, but Harry, plus someone named
Douglas Hofstadter, thought these people were wrong. Because, Harry
had said, if Pansy defected—not at random, but for what seemed to her
like rational reasons—then the other Pansy would think exactly the same
*

581

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

way. Two identical copies wouldn’t decide diﬀerent things. So Pansy had
to choose between a world in which both Pansies cooperated, or a world
in which both Pansies defected, and she was better oﬀ if both copies
cooperated. And if Harry had thought ‘rational’ people did defect in the
Prisoner’s Dilemma, then he wouldn’t have done anything to spread that
kind of ‘rationality’, because a country or a conspiracy full of ‘rational’
people would dissolve into chaos. You would tell your enemies about
‘rationality’.
Which had all sounded reasonable at the time, but now the thought
was occurring to Draco that...
“You said,” Draco said, “that the rational solution to the Prisoner’s
Dilemma is to cooperate. But of course you would want me to believe
that, wouldn’t you?” And if Draco was fooled into cooperating, Harry
would just say, Ha ha, betrayed you again! and laugh at him about it
afterward.
“I wouldn’t fake your lessons,” Harry said seriously. “But I have
to remind you, Draco, that I didn’t say you should just automatically
cooperate. Not on a true Prisoner’s Dilemma like this one. What I said
was that when you choose, you shouldn’t think like you’re choosing for
just yourself, or like you’re choosing for everyone. You should think
like you’re choosing for all the people who are similar enough to you that
they’ll probably do the same thing you do for the same reasons. And also
choosing the predictions made by anyone who knows you well enough
to predict you accurately, so that you never have to regret being rational
because of the correct predictions that other people make about you—
remind me to explain about Newcomb’s Problem at some point. So the
question you and I have to ask, Draco, is this: are we similar enough that
we’ll probably do the same thing whatever it is, making our decisions in
mostly the same way? Or do we know each other well enough to predict
each other, so that I can predict whether you’ll cooperate or defect, and
you can predict that I’ve decided to do the same thing I predict you’ll do,
because I know that you can predict me deciding that?”
...and Draco could not help but think that since he had to strain just
to understand half of that, the answer was obviously ‘No’.
“Yes,” said Draco.
*

582 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

There was a pause.
“I see,” said Harry, sounding disappointed. “Oh, well. I guess we’ll
have to think of some other way, then.”
Draco hadn’t thought that was going to work.
Draco and Harry talked about it back and forth. They had both
agreed much earlier that what they did on the battleﬁeld would not count
as broken promises in real life—though Draco was a little angry about
what Harry had done in Professor Quirrell’s oﬃce, and said so.
But if the two of them couldn’t rely on honor or friendship, that
did leave the question of how to get their armies to work together on
beating Sunshine, despite everything Granger might try to break them
up. Professor Quirrell’s rules didn’t make it tempting to let Sunshine
kill the other army’s soldiers—that just increased the bar you had to pass
yourself—but it did tempt each side to steal kills instead of acting like a
single army would, or to shoot some of the other side’s soldiers during
the confusion of battle...

**
*
Hermione was walking back to Ravenclaw not really looking where she
was going, her mind preoccupied with war and treachery and other ageinappropriate concepts, and she turned a corner and bumped straight
into a grownup.
“Sorry,” she said automatically, and then, entirely without thinking,
“Eeeeek!”
“Don’t worry, Miss Granger,” said the cheerful smile, set beneath the
twinkling eyes, and above the silver beard, of the HEADMASTER OF
HOGWARTS. “You are quite forgiven.”
Her gaze was helplessly locked on the kindly face of the most powerful wizard in the world, who was also the Chief Warlock, who was also
the Supreme Mugwump, who had gone insane years ago from the stress
of ﬁghting the Dark Lord, and numerous other facts that were popping
up into her mind one after the other while her throat went on making
little embarrassing squeaks.
*

583 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

“In fact, Miss Granger,” said Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore, “it is quite lucky that we bumped into each other. Why, I was just
now wondering curiously what the three of you were thinking of asking
for your wishes...”

**
*
Saturday dawned bright and clear and with the students speaking in
hushed voices, as though the ﬁrst to shout might set oﬀ the explosion.

**
*
Draco had hoped that they would be ﬁghting in the upper levels of Hogwarts again. Professor Quirrell had said that real ﬁghts were more likely
to take place in cities than forests, and ﬁghting inside schoolrooms and
corridors was supposed to simulate that, with ribbons to mark the allowed areas. Dragon Army had done well in those ﬁghts.
Instead, just as Draco had feared, Professor Quirrell had come up
with something special for this battle.
The battleground was the Hogwarts Lake.
And not in boats, either.
They were ﬁghting underwater.
The Giant Squid had been temporarily paralyzed; spells had been
set in place to keep away the grindylows; Professor Quirrell had gone
and talked to the merfolk; and all the soldiers had been issued potions of
underwater action that allowed them to breathe, see clearly, talk to each
other, and swim not quite as fast as a fast walk by kicking their legs.
A huge silver sphere hung in the center of the battleground, shining
like a small underwater moon. It would help to provide a sense of direction—at ﬁrst. The moon would slowly go into eclipse as the battle went
on, and when it had gone entirely dark, the battle would end if it hadn’t
already.
War in water. You couldn’t defend a perimeter, attackers could come
at you from any direction, and even with the potion you couldn’t see
very far in the darkness of the lake.
*

584 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

And if you swam too far away from the action, you would start to
glow after a while, and be easy to hunt down—ordinarily if an army scattered and ran instead of ﬁghting, Professor Quirrell would just declare
them defeated; but today they were working on a points system. Of
course you still had some time before you started to glow, if you wanted
to play assassin.
Dragon Army had been set low in the water at the start of the game;
above and far away, the distant underwater moon shone. The murky
water was mostly lit by Lumos Charms, though his soldiers would extinguish the lights as soon as they began maneuvers. There was no point
in letting the enemy see you before you saw them.
Draco kicked his legs a few times, propelling him to a higher position
from which he could gaze down at where his soldiers hovered in the
water.
The conversations died down almost at once under Draco’s icy glare,
his soldiers looking up at him with gratifying expressions of fear and
worry.
“Listen to me very carefully,” said General Malfoy. His voice came
out a little lower, a little burbly with bubbles, libsten to me vebwy caerbfully, but the sound traveled clearly. “There’s only one way we can win
this. We’ve got to march on Sunshine together with Chaos, and beat
Sunshine. Then we ﬁght it out with Potter and win. That’s got to happen, understand? No matter what else goes on, that part has to happen
that way—”
And Draco explained the plan he and Harry had come up with.
Astonished looks were exchanged among the soldiers.
“—and if any of your plots get in the way of that,” ﬁnished Draco,
“after we are out of the water, I will set you on ﬁre.”
There was a nervous chorus of yessirs.
“And everyone with secret orders, make sure you carry them out to
the letter,” said Draco.
Around half his soldiers openly nodded, and Draco marked them for
death after he rose to power.
Of course all the private orders were fake, like one Dragon being told
to oﬀer a false traitor’s commission to another Dragon, and the second
*

585 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Dragon being told in hushed conﬁdence to report anything said by the
ﬁrst Dragon. Draco had told each Dragon that the whole war could
depend on that one thing, and that he hoped they understood it was
more important than the plans they’d previously made. With luck that
would keep all the idiots happy, and maybe ﬂush out a few spies to boot,
if the reports didn’t match the instructions.
Draco’s real plan for winning against Chaos... well, it was simpler
than the one he’d burned, but Father still wouldn’t have liked it. Despite trying, though, Draco hadn’t been able to think of anything better.
It was a plot that couldn’t possibly have worked against anyone except
Harry Potter. In fact it had been Harry’s plan originally, according to
the traitor, though Draco had guessed that without being told. Draco
and the traitor had just modiﬁed it a little...

**
*
Harry took a deep breath, feeling the water gurgle harmlessly in his
lungs.
They’d fought in the forest, and he hadn’t gotten a chance to say it.
They’d fought in the corridors of Hogwarts, and he hadn’t gotten a
chance to say it.
They’d fought in the air, broomsticks issued to every soldier, and it
still hadn’t made sense to say it.
Harry had thought he wouldn’t ever get to say those words, not while
he was still young enough for them to be real...
The Chaos Legionnaires were looking at Harry in puzzlement, as
their general swam with his feet pointing up toward the distant light of
the surface, and his head pointed down toward the murky depths.
“Why are you upside down?” the young commander shouted at his
army, and began to explain how to ﬁght after you abandoned the privileged orientation of gravity.

**
*
*

586 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

A hollow, booming bell echoed through the water, and on the instant,
Zabini and Anthony and ﬁve other soldiers struck out downward, into
the murky depths of the lake. Parvati Patil, the only Gryﬃndor in the
group, turned her head back for a moment and gave them all a cheery
wave as she dived; and after a moment, Scott and Matt did the same. The
rest just sank and vanished.
General Granger swallowed a lump in her throat as she watched them
go. She was risking everything on this, dividing her army instead of just
trying to take as many enemy soldiers with them as possible.
The thing to realize, Zabini had told her, was that no army would
move until they had a plan that let them expect victory. Sunshine
couldn’t just plan to win themselves, they had to make both other armies
think they would win until it was too late.
Ernie and Ron still looked like they were in shock. Susan was gazing
after the disappearing soldiers with a calculating look. Her army, what
was left of it, just looked bewildered, traceries of light dappling on their
uniforms as they all drifted just below the sunlit surface of the lake.
“Now what?” said Ron.
“Now we wait,” said Hermione, loudly enough for all the soldiers to
hear. It felt odd to talk with her mouth full of water, she kept feeling
like she was committing some sort of horrible impoliteness at the dinner
table and was about to drool all over herself. “All of us left here are going
to get zapped, but that was going to happen anyway with Dragon and
Chaos ganging up on us. We’ve just got to take as many of them with
us as we can.”
“I’ve got a plan,” said one of her Sunshine Soldiers... Hannah, her
voice had been a little hard to recognize at ﬁrst. “It’s like all complicated,
but I know how we can get Dragon and Chaos to start ﬁghting each
other—”
“Me too!” said Fay. “I’ve got a plan too! See, Neville Longbottom is
secretly on our side—”
“You were talking to Neville?” said Ernie. “That’s not right, I was
the one who—”
Daphne Greengrass and a couple of other Slytherins who hadn’t gone
with Zabini were giggling helplessly as the cries of “No, wait, I was the
*

587 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

one who got Longbottom” erupted from one soldier after another.
Hermione just looked at them all wearily.
“Okay,” said Hermione when it had all died down, “does everyone
get it? All your plots were faked by the Chaos Legion, or maybe some
by Dragon. Anyone who really wanted to betray Harry or Malfoy went
straight to me or Zabini, not you. Just go ahead and compare notes on
all your secret plots and you’ll see it for yourselves.” She might not be
as good at plotting as Zabini, but she could always understand what all
her oﬃcers told her, that was why Professor Quirrell had made her the
general. “So don’t bother trying to do any plots when the other armies
get here. Just ﬁght, okay? Please?”
“But,” said Ernie with shock on his face, “Neville is in Huﬄepuﬀ!
You’re saying he lied to us?”
Daphne was laughing so hard and so helplessly that the exhalations
had turned her upside down in the water.
“I’m not sure what Longbottom is,” said Ron darkly, “but I don’t
think he’s a Huﬄepuﬀ any more. Not now that Harry Potter’s got to
him.”
“Do you know,” said Susan, “I asked him that, and Neville told me
he had become a Chaos Huﬄepuﬀ?”
“Anyway,” said Hermione in a loud voice. “Zabini took with everyone who we thought was a spy, so in our army we can stop watching
each other quite so hard now, I hope.”
“Anthony was a spy?” yelled Ron.
“Parvati was a spy?” gasped Hannah.
“Parvati was totally a spy,” said Daphne. “She shopped at the spy
shoe store and wore spy lipstick, and someday she’s going to marry a
nice spy husband and have a lot of little spies.”
And then a gong sound echoed through the water, indicating that
Sunshine had just scored two points.
This was shortly followed by the triple gong of Dragon losing a single
point.
Traitors weren’t allowed to kill generals, not after the disaster of the
ﬁrst battle in December when all three generals had been shot in the ﬁrst
minute. But with any luck...
*

588 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

“Aw,” said Hermione. “It sounds like Mr. Crabbe is taking a little
nap.”

**
*
Like two shoals of ﬁsh, the armies swam along.
Neville Longbottom kicked his feet in slow, measured motions. Diving, always diving in whatever direction you happened to be moving.
You wanted to show the enemy the smallest proﬁle, present them with
your head or your feet. So you were always diving, downward and headﬁrst, and the enemy was always down.
Like every Chaos Legionnaire in the army, Neville’s head was constantly rotating as he swam, looking up, down, around, to every side.
Not just watching for Sunshine Soldiers, but watching for any sign that a
Chaos Legionnaire had drawn their wand and was about to betray them.
Usually traitors waited until the confusion of battle to make their move,
but that early gong had put them all on guard.
...the truth was, Neville was feeling sad about that. In November he’d
been a soldier in a united army, all of them pulling together and helping
each other, and now they were all watching each other constantly for the
ﬁrst signs of betrayal. It might have been more fun for General Chaos,
but it wasn’t nearly as much fun for Neville.
The direction formerly known as ‘up’ was getting steadily brighter,
as they came closer to the surface and Sunshine.
“Wands out,” said General Chaos.
Neville’s squad drew their wands, pointing them straight ahead toward the enemy, as their heads scanned around more rapidly. If there
were Sunny traitors, the time was approaching for them to strike.
The other shoal of ﬁsh, Dragon Army, was doing the same thing.
“Now!” shouted the distant voice of the Dragon General.
“Now!” shouted General Chaos.
“For Sunshine!” shouted all the soldiers in both armies, and charged
downward.

**
*
*

589 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

“What?” said Minerva involuntarily as she watched the screens from next
to the lake, a cry echoed in many other places; all of Hogwarts was
watching this battle as they had watched the ﬁrst.
Professor Quirrell was laughing dryly. “I warned you, Headmaster.
It is impossible to have rules without Mr. Potter exploiting them.”

**
*
For long precious seconds, as the forty-seven soldiers charged her own
seventeen, Hermione’s mind went blank.
Why...
Then it all snapped into place.
Every time a soldier originally from Sunshine got shot by someone
crying the name of Sunshine, she would lose a Quirrell point. When two
Sunshine Soldiers were shot by either army, both enemy armies would
be two points closer to overtaking her, it was the same gain only shared.
And if anyone shot another soldier not in the name of Sunshine, that
gong wouldn’t get lost in the confusion...
Hermione was suddenly very glad that Zabini hadn’t gone with the
obvious plan of starting trouble between the other two armies while
they attacked Sunshine.
It was still disheartening, though, that sense of your chances closing
down, of hope being taken away.
Most of Hermione’s soldiers were still looking confused, but some
had expressions of dawning horror as they got it.
“It’s all right,” Susan Bones said ﬁrmly. Heads turned to look at the
Sunshine Captain. “Our job is the same, to take as many of them with
us as we can. And remember, Zabini took away all the spies! We don’t
have to stay on the lookout like they do!” The girl was smiling deﬁantly,
provoking answering smiles from many of the other soldiers, even from
Hermione herself. “It can be like it was in November. We just have to
keep our heads high, ﬁght our best, and trust each other—”
Daphne shot her.

**
*
*

590 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

“Blood for the blood god!” shrieked Neville of Chaos, though since he was
underwater it came out more like ‘Blubbled for the blubbled glub!’
Captain Weasley spun and raised his wand toward Neville and
ﬁred. But Neville was swimming downward toward him, wand pointed
straight ahead, and that meant the Simple Shield could shelter Neville’s
entire proﬁle; if anyone shot him now, it wasn’t going to be Sunny Ron.
A grimly determined look came over Captain Weasley’s face, and he
arrowed straight up toward Neville, mouthing the word Contego, though
the shield wasn’t visible in the water.
The two enemy champions shot toward each other like arrows released from bows, each aimed to split the other down the middle. They
had dueled many times before, but this time would pay for all.
(Far away by the lakeside, a hundred breaths were held.)
“Rainbows and unicorns!” roared the Sunshine Captain.
“The Black Goat with a thousand young!”
“Do your homework!”
Closer and yet closer, the two champions charged, neither willing
to swerve, the ﬁrst person to turn would present a vulnerable broadside
and get shot, though if neither lost their nerve they would crash right
into each other...
Falling straight down as the enemy rose straight up to meet him,
hammer descending to meet anvil in a path neither was willing to leave...
“Special attack, Chaotic Twist!”
Neville saw the look of horror on Captain Weasley’s face as the
Hover Charm caught him. They’d tested it before the battle had started;
and just as Harry had suspected, Wingardium Leviosa became a whole
new sort of weapon once everyone was swimming underwater.
“Curse you, Longbottom!” shrieked Ron Weasley, “Can’t you ever ﬁght
without your dumb special attacks—”
and by that time the Sunshine Captain had been spun around sideways and Neville shot him in the leg.
“I don’t ﬁght fair,” said Neville to the sleeping form, “I ﬁght like
Harry Potter.”

*

591

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

**
*

Granger: 237 / Malfoy: 217 / Potter: 220
It still hurt every time he had to shoot Hermione. Harry could
hardly stand to look at the expression of peace that had come over
her sleeping face, arms now drifting aimlessly as the curves of sunlight
moved over her camouﬂage uniform and the cloud of her chestnut hair.
And if Harry had tried to duck out of being the one to shoot her...
not only would Draco have known what it meant, Hermione would have
been oﬀended.
She’s not dead, Harry said to his brain as his kicking feet pushed him
away, she’s just resting. IDIOT.
Are you sure? said his brain. What if she’s an ex-Hermione? Could we
go back and check?
Harry glanced back brieﬂy.
See, she’s ﬁne, there are bubbles coming out of her mouth.
Could’ve been her last breath escaping.
Oh be quiet. Why are you being so paranoid-protective, anyway?
Er, ﬁrst real friend we’ve ever had in our whole life? Hey, remember
what happened to our pet rock?
Would you SHUT UP about that worthless lump of rubble, it wasn’t
even alive let alone sentient, that is like the most pathetic childhood trauma
ever—
The two armies swiftly separated, becoming two shoals of ﬁsh once
more.
General Granger had gone down seventeen points, and taken three
Chaotics and two Dragons with her; and one Chaotic and two Dragons
had been shot as traitors. So she’d lost net seven points, Harry had lost
one, Draco had lost two; that put Sunshine twenty points up on Dragon,
and seventeen points up on Chaos. Chaos could still win easily if they
exterminated all twenty remaining Dragons. The wild card, of course,
being those seven remaining Sunshine Soldiers...
...if you could call them that.
*

592 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

The two shoals swam uneasily next to each other, the soldiers in each
army awaiting an order to call out their true allegiances, and attack...
“Everyone who got them,” Harry said loudly, “remember Special
Orders One through Three. And don’t forget it’s Merlin Says on Three.
Do not acknowledge.”
The trustworthy two-thirds of the army did not nod, and the other
third just looked puzzled.
Special Order One: Don’t bother trying to call out any codewords in this
battle, don’t expend eﬀort on any plot not specially approved by the commander; just swim, shield, and ﬁre.
Hermione and Draco had both been ﬁghting their soldiers, trying to
get them to stop plotting on their own all through December. Harry
had egged his soldiers on and supported their plotting through the last
two battles... while also telling them that at some future point he might
ask them to put a plot or two on hold, to which they’d all readily agreed.
So now, in this critical battle, they were happy to obey.
Neither Hermione or Draco could have given that order successfully, Harry was certain. It was the diﬀerence between your soldiers
seeing you as an ally in their plotting, and seeing you as a spoilsport
old fuddy-duddy who didn’t want them to have any fun. Imposition of
order equaled escalation of chaos, and it also worked in reverse...
“There they are!” shouted someone, and pointed.
From the depths of the lake arose the forgotten ones, the ones who’d
forsaken the last battle, the seven missing Sunshine Soldiers, glowing
with the bright aura of cowards, now fading as they returned to battle.
The two shoals of ﬁsh wavered, pointing wands uneasily.
“Hold your ﬁre!” shouted Harry, and a similar cry came from General Malfoy.
There was a moment of held breath.
Then the seven Sunshine Soldiers swam up to join Dragon Army.
There was a triumphant cheer from Dragon Army.
There were cries of dismay from a third of the Chaos Legion.
Some of the other two-thirds smiled, though they shouldn’t have.
Harry wasn’t smiling.
Oh, this is so completely not going to work...
*

593 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

But Harry hadn’t been able to think of anything better.
“Special Orders Two and Three still apply!” shouted Harry. “Fight!”
“For the Chaos Legion!” roared twenty Chaotic Legionnaires.
“For Dragon Army!” roared twenty Dragon Warriors and seven Sunshine Soldiers.
And the Chaotics dived straight downward, as all the traitors got
ready to strike.

**
*
Granger: 237 / Malfoy: 220 / Potter: 226
Draco’s head darted around frantically, trying to weigh up what was
happening; somehow, despite his greater forces, he’d lost the initiative.
Four small Chaotic forces were being pursued by four larger Dragon
forces, but because Draco’s forces were the ones trying to force an engagement, it meant that they had to follow where Chaos ran, and somehow that was producing concentrations of Chaotic force that would ﬁre
into the exposed sides of Dragon—
It was happening again!
“Prismatis!” shouted Draco, raising his wand, and that shield you
could see even through the water, a sparkling multicolored ﬂat wall wide
enough to shield Draco and the ﬁve other Dragons with him from the
Chaotic force that had just started ﬁring on them as they swam past, and
that let the other ﬁve Dragons turn their attentions back to the Chaotic
force they’d been chasing—
There was a tense moment as sleep spell after sleep spell crashed into
Draco’s Prismatic Wall, and Draco was hoping to Merlin that none of
those four Chaotics had learned the Breaking Drill Hex—
Then there was the bell of a Dragon victory, and the Chaotic force
spun head-for-foot and began swimming away; and Draco, his hands now
shaking slightly, dropped the Prismatic Wall and lowered his wand.
Fighting in water was more exhausting even than ﬁghting on broomsticks.
“Do not pursue!” Draco cried to his soldiers as they started to follow,
then, “Sonorus! REFORM ON ME!”
*

594 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

The Dragon forces started converging on Draco, and the Chaotic
forces spun around and began pursuing the Dragons on the instant—
Draco swore out loud as he heard the bell of a Chaotic victory, someone
hadn’t gotten their Simple Shield oriented right—and then the Dragon
forces were in supporting range of each other and the Chaotics were
moving back into the murky distance.
Somehow, despite their numerical superiority, the Dragons had
scored three times against the Chaotics and the Chaotics had scored four
times back, and he’d heard one Dragon spy get executed. Either Harry
Potter had thought of a lot of very good ideas very fast, or for some
unimaginable reason he’d already spent a lot of time working out how
to ﬁght underwater. This wasn’t working, and Draco needed to rethink
things.
It looked like everyone was having trouble aiming while swimming,
too, the battle might last long enough that time would be called... the
distant underwater moon was only half full now, that wasn’t good... he
had to rethink things fast...
“What is it?” said Padma Patil, as she and her force swam over toward
Draco.
Padma was his second-in-command; she was clever and powerful, and
better yet, she hated Granger and saw Harry as a rival, which made her
trustworthy. Working with Padma was making him realize the truth of
the old adage that Ravenclaw was sister to Slytherin; Draco had been
surprised when his father had told him it was an acceptable House for
his future wife, but now he saw the sense of it.
“Wait until we’re all here,” Draco said. The truth was, he needed to
catch his breath. That was the trouble with being the general and the
most powerful wizard, you had to keep using magic.
Zabini came in next, commanding a force of two Sunnies and four
Dragons, one of whom was Gregory keeping an eye on Zabini. Draco
didn’t trust Zabini. And neither Draco nor Zabini trusted the Sunnies
enough to make them a majority of any unit; they were supposed to be
loyal either to Draco directly, or to Granger who’d been fooled by the
promise that the Dragons would be betrayed in the end after both forces
had been depleted, just as Harry’s more trusted Chaotics should’ve been
*

595 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

fooled into not shooting at the Sunnies by the promise of their ﬁring fake
Sleep Hexes and switching to support Chaos later; but it was possible
some of the Sunnies were loyal to Chaos and weren’t ﬁring real Sleep
Hexes and that was why Dragon wasn’t winning the way their numerical
advantage should’ve let them win...
The next unit that approached was depleted, three soldiers holding
wands on two other soldiers, who were swimming with empty hands.
Draco gritted his teeth. More traitor problems. He needed to talk to
Professor Quirrell about having some way to punish traitors at least, conditions like these were unrealistic, in real life you tortured your traitors
to death.
“General Malfoy!” shouted the commander of the problem unit as
it swam up, a Ravenclaw boy named Terry. “We don’t know what to
do—Cesi shot Bogdan, but Cesi says Kellah told him that Bogdan shot
Specter—”
“I didn’t!” said Kellah.
“Yes you did!” shrieked Cesi. “General Malfoy, she’s the spy, I
should’ve rea—”
“Somnium,” said Draco.
There was the triple bell of a one-point loss from Dragon, and then
Kellah’s limp body began to ﬂoat away in the water.
Draco had heard the word ‘recursion’ by this point, and he knew a
Harry Potter plot when he saw one.
(Unfortunately Draco had not heard of autoimmune disorders, and
the thought did not readily occur to him that a clever virus would begin
its attack by creating symptoms of an autoimminue disorder so as to get
the body to distrust its own immune system...)
“General order!” said Draco, raising his voice. “Nobody gets to shoot
spies except myself, Gregory, Padma, and Terry. If anyone sees anything
suspicious they come to one of us.”
And then—
There was the bell of Sunshine scoring two points.
“What?” said Draco and Zabini around the same time; their heads
swiveled around. No one seemed to have gotten hit, and all the Sunshine soldiers were present and accounted for. (Except Parvati, who had
*

596 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

been shot by some still-unknown traitor in Padma’s squad; and of course
Padma had shot Parvati again in case she was faking, so it wasn’t her...)
“A Sunny traitor in Chaos?” said Zabini, sounding puzzled. “But all
the ones I knew about were supposed to strike during Chaos’s attack on
Sunshine—”
“No!” said Padma in a tone of sudden realization. “That was Chaos
executing a spy!”
“What?” said Zabini. “But why—”
And Draco got it. Damn it! “Because Potter thinks he’s safe for how
much he beats Sunshine, but not for how much he beats us! So he doesn’t
want to lose a single point when he executes a traitor! General order! If
you have to execute a traitor, call Sunshine ﬁrst! Do that only until the
Sunshine bell has rung four more times! And don’t forget to switch back
to Dragon afterward—”

**
*
Granger: 253 / Malfoy: 252 / Potter: 252
Longbottom’s body drifted chaotically through the water, arms and
legs disarrayed. After Draco had ﬁnally got a hit in they’d all shot him
again just to be sure.
Nearby was Harry Potter, now protected by a Prismatic Sphere,
looking at them all grimly as the last sliver of crescent moon slowly
diminished, somewhere far away. If Longbottom had managed to shoot
one more soldier (Draco knew Harry was thinking), if the two Chaotics
had managed to hold out just a little longer, they might have won...
After Draco had reformed his forces and struck out again, the ensuing battle and execution of spies in Sunshine’s name had left Sunshine
exactly one point ahead of Dragon and Chaos both. Once Harry had
started doing it, Draco had been left with no choice but to follow suit.
But now they had General Chaos outnumbered three to one, the
survivors of Dragon Army and the last remaining Sunny traitor: Draco,
and Padma, and Zabini.
And Draco, who was no fool, had ordered Padma to take Zabini’s
wand after Longbottom had shot Gregory and fallen in turn to Draco.
*

597 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

The boy had given him an insulted look, told Draco that he owed him
for this, and handed it over.
That left Draco and Padma to take down General Chaos.
“I don’t suppose you’d like to surrender?” said Draco, smiling as
evilly as any smile he’d ever directed at Harry Potter.
“Sleep before surrender!” shouted General Chaos.
“Just so you know,” said Draco, “Zabini doesn’t actually have an
older sister for you to rescue from Gryﬃndor bullies. But Zabini does
have a mother who doesn’t approve of Muggleborns like Granger, and I
wrote her a few notes, and oﬀered Zabini a few favors—nothing involving my father, just things I can do in school. And by the way, Zabini’s
mother doesn’t approve of the Boy-Who-Lived, either. Just in case you
still thought Zabini was really on your side.”
Harry’s face grew even grimmer.
Draco raised his wand, and began breathing rhythmically, building
up strength for a Breaking Drill Hex. Granger’s Prismatic Sphere was
almost as strong as Draco’s now, and Harry’s wasn’t much weaker, where
did those two ﬁnd time?
“Lagann!” spoke Draco, putting everything he had into it, and the
green spiral blazed out and Harry’s shield shattered, and at almost the
same moment—
“Somnium!” said Padma.

**
*
Granger: 253 / Malfoy: 252 / Potter: 254
Harry let out a long breath of relief, and not just because he didn’t
have to hold the Prismatic Sphere any more. His hand was shaking as
he lowered his wand.
“You know,” said Harry, “I was pretty worried there for a moment.”
Special Order Two: If a Sunny traitor doesn’t seem to be really shooting
at you, fake being hit occasionally. Prefer targeting Dragons to Sunnies but
go ahead and shoot Sunnies if you can’t shoot Dragons.
Special Order Three: Merlin says do not shoot at Blaise Zabini or either
Patil twin.
*

598 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

With a wide grin, Parvati Patil stripped the Transﬁgured patch oﬀ
her uniform’s insignia, and let it ﬂoat away in the water.
“Gryﬃndors for Chaos,” she said, and handed Zabini his wand back.
“Thank you very much,” Harry said, and bowed sweepingly to the
Gryﬃndor girl. “And thank you as well,” bowing to Zabini. “You know,
when you came to me with that plan, I wondered if you were brilliant
or crazy, and I’ve decided that you’re both. And by the way,” Harry
said, now turning as though to address Draco’s body, “Zabini does have
a cousin—”
“Somnium,” said Zabini’s voice.

**
*
Granger: 255 / Malfoy: 252 / Potter: 254
And Harry Potter’s body ﬂoated away, his expression of shock and
horror quickly relaxing into sleep.
“On second thought,” Parvati said cheerfully, “make that Gryﬃndors for Sunshine.”
She started to laugh, more exhiliarated than she’d ever been in her
life, she’d ﬁnally gotten to assassinate and replace her twin sister and she’d
wanted to do that since forever, and this had been perfect, it had all been
perfect—
—and then her wand spun around in a lightning motion just as
Zabini’s wand turned to point at her.
“Wait!” said Zabini. “Do not shoot, do not resist. That’s an order.”
“What?” said Parvati.
“Sorry,” said Zabini, looking not-quite-sincerely apologetic, “but I
can’t be totally sure you’re for Sunshine. So I order you to let me shoot
you.”
“Hold on!” said Parvati. “We’re only ahead of Chaos by one point!
If you shoot me now—”
“I’ll shoot you in the name of Dragon, obviously,” said Zabini, now
sounding a little superior. “Just because we tricked them into doing it,
doesn’t mean it won’t work for us.”
*

599 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Parvati stared at him, her eyes narrowing. “General Malfoy said your
mother doesn’t like Hermione.”
“I suppose,” said Zabini, still with that superior smirk. “But some of
us are more willing than Draco Malfoy to annoy a parent.”
“And Harry Potter said you have a cousin—”
“Nope,” said Zabini.
Parvati stared at him, trying to think, but she wasn’t really good at
plotting; Zabini’d said the plan was to secretly keep the scores of Chaos
and Dragon as even as possible so they’d use Sunshine’s name to execute their traitors instead of losing even a single point, and that had
worked... but... she had the feeling she was missing something, she wasn’t
a Slytherin...
“Why don’t I shoot you in the name of Dragon?” said Parvati.
“Because I outrank you,” said Zabini.
Parvati had a bad feeling about this.
She stared at him for a long moment.
And then—
“Somni—” she started to say, and then realized she hadn’t said for
Dragon, and frantically cut herself oﬀ—

**
*
Granger: 255 / Malfoy: 254 / Potter: 254
“Hey, everyone,” said Blaise Zabini’s face on the screens, looking
quite amused, “guess it’s all down to me.”
All by the lakeside, people were holding their breath.
Sunshine was ahead of Dragon and Chaos by exactly one point.
Blaise Zabini could shoot himself in the name of either Dragon or
Chaos, or just leave things the way they were.
A series of chimes indicated that the last minute of time was running
out.
And the Slytherin was smiling a strange, twisted smile, and casually
toying with his wand, the dark wood barely visible in the dark water.
* 600 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS I

*
*

*

“You know,” said Blaise Zabini’s voice, in the tones of someone
who’d been rehearsing the words for a while, “it’s just a game, really.
And games are supposed to be fun. So how about if I just do whatever I
feel like?”

*

601 *

CHAPTER

THIRT Y-FOUR

COORDINATION
PROBLEMS, PART II
inerva and Dumbledore together had applied their combined
talent to conjure the grand stage toward which Quirrell now
slowly trudged; it was, at its core, sturdy wood, but the outer surfaces
shone with glitter of marble inlaid with platinum and studded with gems
of every House color. Neither she nor the Headmaster was any Founder
of Hogwarts, but the conjuration only needed to last a few hours. Minerva ordinarily enjoyed the few occasions when she had the occasion to
tire herself out on large Transﬁgurations; she should have enjoyed the
many small chances for artistry, and the illusion of opulence; but this
time she had done the work with the dreadful feeling of digging her own
grave.
But Minerva was feeling a little better now. There’d been one brief
moment when the explosion might’ve come; but Dumbledore had already been standing up and applauding warmly, and no one had proven
foolish enough to riot in front of the Headmaster.
And the explosive mood had rapidly faded into a collective sentiment
which might perhaps have been described by the phrase: Give us a break!
Behind the stage, waiting to ascend, three children were glaring at
each other in mingled fury and frustration. It didn’t help that they
were still damp from being ﬁshed out of the lake, and that the Warming
Charms didn’t seem quite enough to make up for the crisp December
air, or maybe it was just their mood.
“That’s it,” said Granger. “I’ve had it! No more traitors!”

M

*

603 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

“I completely agree with you, Miss Granger,” Draco said icily.
“Enough is enough.”
“And what do you two intend to do about it?” snapped Harry Potter.
“Professor Quirrell already said he wouldn’t ban spies!”
“We’ll ban them for him,” said Draco grimly. He hadn’t even understood what he meant by the words as he said them, but the very act of
speaking seemed to crystallize a plan—
The stage really was well done, at least for a temporary structure; the
makers hadn’t fallen into the usual pitfall of being impressed by their
own illusion of wealth, and knew something about architecture and visual style. From where Draco stood, in the obvious place for him to
stand, the watching students would see him haloed in the faint glitter of
emeralds; and Granger, standing where Draco had subtly motioned her,
would be haloed in Ravenclaw’s sapphire. As for Harry Potter, Draco
wasn’t looking at him right now.
Professor Quirrell had... awakened, or whatever it was he did; and
was leaning upon a platinum podium bare of all gems. With evident
showmanship, the Defense Professor was carefully stacking and squaring
those three envelopes containing the three parchments upon which the
three generals had written their wishes, as all the students of Hogwarts
watched, and waited.
Finally Professor Quirrell looked up from the envelopes. “Well,”
said the Defense Professor. “This is inconvenient.”
A slight titter of laughter ran through the crowd, with a sharp undertone.
“I suppose you are all wondering what I will do?” said Professor Quirrell. “There is nothing for it; I shall have to do what is fair. Although
ﬁrst there was a little speech I wanted to make, and before even that, it
appears to me that Mr. Malfoy and Miss Granger have something they
wish to share.”
Draco blinked, and then he and Granger traded rapid glances—may
I?—yes, go ahead— and Draco raised his voice.
“General Granger and I would both like to say,” Draco said in his
most formal voice, knowing it was being ampliﬁed and heard, “that we
will no longer accept the help of any traitors. And if, in any battle, we
*

604 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS II

*
*

*

ﬁnd that Potter has accepted traitors from either of our armies, we will
join forces to crush him.”
And Draco shot a glance ﬁlled at malice at the Boy-Who-Lived. Take
that, General Chaos!
“I agree completely with General Malfoy,” said Granger standing beside him, her high voice clear and strong. “Neither of us will use traitors,
and if General Potter does, we will wipe him oﬀ the battleﬁeld.”
There was a sursurration of surprise from the watching students.
“Very good,” said their Defense Professor, smiling. “It took the two
of you long enough, but you are still to be congratulated on having
thought of it before any other generals.”
It took a moment for this to soak in—
“In the future, Mr. Malfoy, Miss Granger, before you come to my
oﬃce with any request, consider whether there is a way for you to accomplish it without my help. I will not deduct Quirrell points on this
occasion, but next time you may expect to lose the full ﬁfty.” Professor
Quirrell wore an amused grin. “And what do you have to say about that,
Mr. Potter?”
Harry Potter’s gaze went to Granger, then to Draco. His face appeared calm; though Draco was sure controlled would have been the better term.
Finally Harry Potter spoke, his voice level. “The Chaos Legion is
still happy to accept traitors. See you on the battleﬁeld.”
Draco knew the shock was showing on his own face; there were astonished murmurs from the watching students, and when Draco glanced
at the front row he saw that even Harry’s Chaotics looked taken aback.
Granger’s face was angry, and getting angrier. “Mr. Potter,” she said
in a sharp tone like she thought she was a teacher, “are you trying to be
obnoxious?”
“Most certainly not,” Harry Potter said calmly. “I won’t make you
do it every time. Beat me once, and I’ll stay beaten. But threats aren’t
always enough, General of Sunshine. You did not ask me to join with
you, but tried simply to impose your will; and sometimes you must actually defeat the enemy, to impose your will on him. You see, I am
skeptical that Hermione Granger, the brightest academic star of Hog*

605 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

warts, and Draco, son of Lucius, scion of the Noble and Most Ancient
House of Malfoy, can work together to beat their common foe, Harry
Potter.” An amused smile crossed Harry Potter’s face. “Maybe I’ll just
do what Draco tried with Zabini, and write a letter to Lucius Malfoy
and see what he thinks about that.”
“Harry!” gasped Granger, looking absolutely aghast, and there were
gasps from the audience as well.
Draco controlled the anger ﬂushing through him. That had been a
stupid move on Harry’s part, saying that in public. If Harry had simply
done it, it might have worked, Draco hadn’t even thought about that,
but now if Father did that it would look like he was playing into Harry’s
hands—
“If you think my father, Lord Malfoy, can be manipulated by you that
easily,” Draco said coldly, “you have a surprise coming, Harry Potter.”
And Draco realized as the words ﬁnished leaving his mouth that he’d
just backed his own father squarely into the corner, more or less without
even meaning to. Father probably wasn’t going to like this, not the tiniest bit, but now it would be impossible for him to say so... Draco would
have to apologize for that, it had been an honest accident, but it was
strange to think that he’d done it at all.
“Then go ahead and defeat the evil General Chaos,” Harry said, still
looking amused. “I can’t win against both your armies—not if you really
work together. But I wonder if perhaps I could break you up before
then.”
“You won’t, and we’ll crush you!” said Draco Malfoy.
And beside him, Hermione Granger ﬁrmly nodded.
“Well,” said Professor Quirrell after the astounded silence had
stretched for a while. “That was not how I expected that particular conversation to go.” The Defense Professor had a rather intrigued expression
on his face. “Truthfully, Mr. Potter, I expected you to concede immediately and with a smile, then announce that you had long since worked
out my intended lesson but had decided not to spoil it for others. Indeed,
I planned my speech accordingly, Mr. Potter.”
Harry Potter just shrugged. “Sorry about that,” he said, and said
nothing more.
*

606 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS II

*
*

*

“Oh, don’t worry,” said Professor Quirrell. “This, too, will serve.”
And Professor Quirrell turned from the three children, and straightened at the podium to address the whole watching crowd; his customary
air of detached amusement dropped away like a falling mask, and when
he spoke again his voice was ampliﬁed louder than it had been.
“If not for Harry Potter,” said Professor Quirrell, his voice as crisp
and cold as December, “You-Know-Who would have won.”
The silence was instant, and total.
“Make no mistake,” said Professor Quirrell. “The Dark Lord was
winning. There were fewer and fewer Aurors who dared face him, the
vigilantes who opposed him were being hunted down. One Dark Lord
and perhaps ﬁfty Death Eaters were winning against a country of thousands. That is beyond ridiculous! There are no grades low enough for
me to mark that incompetence!”
There was a frown on the face of Headmaster Dumbledore; and on
the faces of the audience, puzzlement; and the utter silence went on.
“Do you understand now how it happened? You saw it today. I
allowed traitors, and gave the generals no means to restrain them. You
saw the result. Clever plots and clever betrayals, until the last soldier
left on the battleﬁeld shot himself! You cannot possibly doubt that all
three of those armies could have been defeated by any outside foe that
was uniﬁed within itself.”
Professor Quirrell leaned forward at the podium, his voice now ﬁlled
with a grim intensity. His right hand stretched out, ﬁngers open and
spread. “Division is weakness,” said the Defense Professor. His hand
closed into a tight ﬁst. “Unity is strength. The Dark Lord understood
that well, whatever his other follies; and he used that understanding to
create the one simple invention that made him the most terrible Dark
Lord in history. Your parents faced one Dark Lord. And ﬁfty Death
Eaters who were perfectly uniﬁed, knowing that any breach of their loyalty would be punished by death, that any slack or incompetence would
be punished by pain. None could escape the Dark Lord’s grasp once
they took his Mark. And the Death Eaters agreed to take that terrible
Mark because they knew that once they took it, they would be united,
facing a divided land. One Dark Lord and ﬁfty Death Eaters would have
*

607 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

defeated an entire country, by the power of the Dark Mark.”
Professor Quirrell’s voice was bleak and hard. “Your parents could
have fought back in kind. They did not. There was a man named Yermy
Wibble who called upon the nation to institute a draft, though he did not
quite have vision enough to propose a Mark of Britain. Yermy Wibble
knew what would happen to him; he hoped his death would inspire others. So the Dark Lord took his family for good measure. Their empty
skins inspired nothing but fear, and no one dared to speak again. And
your parents would have faced the consequences of their despicable cowardice, if not for being saved by a one-year-old boy.” Professor Quirrell’s
face showed full contempt. “A dramatist would have called that a dei ex
machina, for they did nothing to earn their salvation. He-Who-MustNot-Be-Named may not have deserved to win, but make no doubt of it,
your parents deserved to lose.”
The voice of the Defense Professor rang forth like iron. “And know
this: your parents have learned nothing! The nation is still fragmented
and weak! How few decades passed between Grindelwald and YouKnow-Who? Do you think you will not see the next threat in your own
lifetimes? Will you repeat then the follies of your parents, when you
have seen the results so clearly laid out before you this day? For I can
tell you what your parents will do, when the day of darkness comes! I
can tell you what lesson they have learned! They have learned to hide
like cowards and do nothing while they wait for Harry Potter to save
them!”
There was a wondering look in the eyes of Headmaster Dumbledore;
and other students gazed up at their Defense Professor with bewilderment and anger and awe.
Professor Quirrell’s eyes were as cold now as his voice. “Mark this,
and mark it well. He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named wished to rule over this
country, to hold it in his cruel grasp forever. But at least he wished to
rule over a living country, and not a heap of ash! There have been Dark
Lords who were mad, who wished only to make the world a vast funeral pyre! There have been wars in which one whole country marched
against another! Your parents nearly lost against half a hundred, who
thought to take this country alive! How quickly would they have been
*

608 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS II

*
*

*

crushed by a foe more numerous than they, a foe that cared for nothing
but their destruction? This I foretell: When the next threat rises, Lucius
Malfoy will claim that you must follow him or perish, that your only
hope is to trust in his cruelty and strength. And though Lucius Malfoy
himself will believe it, this will be a lie. For when the Dark Lord perished, Lucius Malfoy did not unite the Death Eaters, they were shattered
in an instant, they ﬂed like whipped dogs and betrayed each other! Lucius Malfoy is not strong enough to be a true Lord, Dark or otherwise.”
Draco Malfoy’s ﬁsts were clenched white, there were tears in his eyes,
and fury, and unbearable shame.
“No,” said Professor Quirrell, “I do not think it will be Lucius Malfoy who saves you. And lest you think that I speak on my own behalf,
time will make clear soon enough that this is not so. I make you no
recommendation, my students. But I say that if a whole country were
to ﬁnd a leader as strong as the Dark Lord, but honorable and pure, and
take his Mark; then they could crush any Dark Lord like an insect, and
all the rest of our divided magical world could not threaten them. And if
some still greater enemy rose against us in a war of extermination, then
only a united magical world could survive.”
There were gasps, mostly from Muggleborns; the students in greentrimmed robes looked merely puzzled. Now it was Harry Potter whose
ﬁsts were clenched tight and trembling; and Hermione Granger beside
him was angry and dismayed.
The Headmaster rose from his seat, his face now stern, saying no
word as yet; but the command was clear.
“I do not say what threat will come,” said Professor Quirrell. “But
you will not live all your lives in peace, not if the past history of the
world is any guide at all to its future. And if you do in the future as you
have seen three armies do this day, if you cannot throw aside your petty
bickering and take the Mark of a single leader, then indeed you might
wish that the Dark Lord had lived to rule over you, and regret the day
that ever Harry Potter was born—”
“Enough!” bellowed Albus Dumbledore.
There was silence.
Professor Quirrell slowly turned his head to gaze at where Albus
*

609 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

Dumbledore stood in the fury of his wizardry; their eyes met, and a
soundless stress pressed down like weight upon all the students, as they
listened not daring to move.
“You, too, failed this country,” said Professor Quirrell. “And you
know the peril as well as I.”
“Such speeches are not for the ears of students,” said Albus Dumbledore in a dangerously rising voice. “Nor for the mouths of professors!”
Dryly, then, Professor Quirrell spoke: “There were many speeches
made for the ears of adults, as the Dark Lord rose. And the adults clapped
and cheered, and went home having enjoyed their day’s entertainment.
But I will obey you, Headmaster, and make no further speeches if you
do not like them. My lesson is simple. I will go on doing nothing about
traitors, and we will see what students can do for themselves about that,
when they do not wait for professors to save them.”
And then Professor Quirrell turned back to his students, and his
mouth quirked up in a wry grin that seemed to dissipate the dreadful
pressure like a god blowing to scatter the clouds. “But do please be kind
to the traitors up until now,” said Professor Quirrell. “They were just
having fun.”
There was laughter, though it was nervous at ﬁrst, and then it seemed
to build, as Professor Quirrell stood there smiling wryly and some of the
tension released itself.
Draco’s mind was still whirling through a thousand questions and a
daze of horror, as Professor Quirrell prepared to open the envelopes in
which the three had inscribed their wishes.
It had never before occurred to Draco that moon-traveling Muggles
were a greater threat than the slow decline of wizardry, or that Father
had proven himself too weak to stop them.
And even stranger, the obvious implication: Professor Quirrell believed that Harry could. The Defense Professor claimed to have made
no recommendation, but he’d mentioned Harry Potter over and over in
his speech; others would already be thinking the same thing as Draco.
It was ridiculous. The boy who had covered a stuﬀed chair in glitter
and called it a throne—
The boy who faced down Snape and won, whispered a traitorous voice,
*

610

*

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS II

*
*

*

that boy could grow into a Lord strong enough to rule, strong enough to save
us all—
Harry had been raised by Muggles! He was practically a mudblood
himself, he wouldn’t ﬁght against his adopted family—
He knows their arts, their secrets and their methods; he can take all of
the Muggles’ science and use it against them, alongside our own power as
wizards.
But what if he refuses? What if he’s too weak?
Then, said that inner voice, it will have to be you, won’t it, Draco Malfoy?
And then there was a renewed hush from the crowd, as Professor
Quirrell opened the ﬁrst envelope.
“Mr. Malfoy,” said Professor Quirrell, “your wish is for... Slytherin
to win the House Cup.”
There was a puzzled pause from the watching audience.
“Yes, Professor,” said Draco in a clear voice, knowing that it was
once again being ampliﬁed. “If you can’t do that, then something else
for Slytherin—”
“I will not award House points unfairly,” said Professor Quirrell. He
tapped a cheek, looking thoughtful. “Which makes your wish diﬃcult
enough to be interesting. Would you like to say anything about why,
Mr. Malfoy?”
Draco turned from the Defense Professor, gazed out at the crowd
from against that backdrop of platinum and emeralds. Not all of
Slytherin had cheered for Dragon Army, there were anti-Malfoy factions who had expressed that dissatisfaction by supporting the Boy-WhoLived, or even Granger; and those factions would be encouraged greatly
by what Zabini had done. He needed to remind them that Slytherin
meant Malfoy and Malfoy meant Slytherin—
“No,” said Draco. “They’re Slytherins, they’ll understand.”
There was some laughter from the audience, especially in Slytherin,
even from some students who would have called themselves anti-Malfoy
a moment earlier.
Flattery was a lovely thing.
Draco turned back to look at Professor Quirrell again, and was sur*

611

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

prised to see an embarrassed look on Granger’s face.
“And for Miss Granger...” said Professor Quirrell. There was the
sound of a tearing envelope. “Your wish is for... Ravenclaw to win the
House Cup?”
There was considerable laughter from the audience, including a
chuckle from Draco. He hadn’t thought Granger played that game.
“Well, um,” said Granger, sounding like she was suddenly stumbling
over a memorized speech, “I meant to say, that...” She took a deep breath.
“There were soldiers from every House in my army, and I don’t mean
to slight any of them. But Houses should still count for something, too.
It was sad when students in the same House were hexing each other just
because they were in diﬀerent armies. People should be able to rely on
whoever’s in their House. That’s why Godric Gryﬃndor, and Salazar
Slytherin, and Rowena Ravenclaw, and Helga Huﬄepuﬀ created the four
Houses of Hogwarts in the ﬁrst place. I’m the General of Sunshine, but
even before that, I’m Hermione Granger of Ravenclaw, and I’m proud
to be part of a House that’s eight hundred years old.”
“Well said, Miss Granger!” said Dumbledore’s booming voice.
Harry Potter was frowning, and something tickled at the edge of
Draco’s recognition.
“An interesting sentiment, Miss Granger,” said Professor Quirrell.
“But there are times when it is good for a Slytherin to have friends in
Ravenclaw, or for a Gryﬃndor to have friends in Huﬄepuﬀ. Surely it
would be best if you could rely both on your friends in your House, and
also your friends in your army?”
Granger’s eyes ﬂicked brieﬂy toward the watching students and
teachers, and she said nothing.
Professor Quirrell nodded as though to himself, and then turned
back to the podium, and took up and tore open the last envelope. Beside Draco, Harry Potter visibly tensed up as the Defense Professor drew
forth the parchment. “And Mr. Potter wishes for—”
There was a pause as Professor Quirrell looked at the parchment.
Then, without any change of expression on Professor Quirrell’s face,
the sheet of parchment burst into ﬂames, and burned with a brief, intense ﬁre that left only drifting black dust sprinkling down from his
*

612

*

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS II

*
*

*

hand.
“Please conﬁne yourself to the possible, Mr. Potter,” said Professor
Quirrell, sounding very dry indeed.
There was a long pause; Harry, standing beside Draco, looked rather
shaken.
What in Merlin’s name did he ask for?
“I do hope,” said Professor Quirrell, “that you prepared another
wish, if I could not grant that one.”
There was another pause.
Harry drew a deep breath. “I didn’t,” he said, “but I already thought
of another one.” Harry Potter turned to look out at the audience, and
his voice ﬁrmed as he spoke. “People fear traitors because of the damage
the traitor does directly, the soldiers they shoot or the secrets they tell.
But that’s only part of the danger. What people do because they’re afraid
of traitors also costs them. I used that strategy today against Sunshine
and Dragon. I didn’t tell my traitors to cause as much direct damage as
possible. I told them to act in the way that would create the most distrust
and confusion, and make the generals do the most costly things to try
and stop them from doing it again. When there are just a few traitors
and a whole country opposing them, it stands to reason that what a few
traitors do might be less damaging than what a whole country does to
stop them, that the cure might be worse than the disease—”
“Mr. Potter,” said the Defense Professor, his voice suddenly cutting,
“the lesson of history is that you are simply wrong. Your parents’ generation did too little to unify themselves, not too much! This whole
country almost fell, Mr. Potter, though you were not there to see it. I
suggest that you ask your dorm-mates in Ravenclaw how many of them
have lost family to the Dark Lord. Or if you are wiser, do not ask! Do
you have a wish to make, Mr. Potter?”
“If you don’t mind,” said the mild voice of Albus Dumbledore, “I
should like to hear what the Boy-Who-Lived has to say. He has more
experience than either of us at stopping wars.”
A few people laughed, but not many.
Harry Potter’s gaze moved to Dumbledore, and he looked considering for a moment. “I’m not saying you’re wrong, Professor Quirrell.
*

613

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

In the last war, people didn’t act together, and a whole country almost
fell to a few dozen attackers, and yes, that was pathetic. And if we make
the same mistake next time, yes, that’ll be even more pathetic. But you
never ﬁght the same war twice. And the problem is, the enemy is also
allowed to be smart. If you’re divided you’re vulnerable in one way; but
when you try to unite, then you face other risks, and other costs, and the
enemy will try to take advantage of those, too. You can’t stop thinking
at just one level of the game.”
“Simplicity also has a great deal to commend it, Mr. Potter,” said the
dry voice of the Defense Professor. “I do hope that you have learned
something this day about the dangers of strategies more complicated
than uniting your people and attacking your enemy. And if all this does
not tie into your wish somehow, I shall be quite annoyed.”
“Yes,” said Harry Potter, “it was pretty diﬃcult coming up with a
wish to symbolize the costs of unity. But the problem of acting together
isn’t just for wars, it’s something we have to solve all our lives, every
day. If everyone is coordinating using the same rules, and the rules are
stupid, then if one person decides to do things diﬀerently, they’re breaking the rules. But if everyone decides to do things diﬀerently, they can.
It’s exactly the same problem of everyone needing to act together. But
for the ﬁrst person who speaks out, it seems like they’re going against
the crowd. And if you thought that the only important thing was that
people should always be uniﬁed, then you could never change the game,
no matter how stupid the rules. So my own wish, to symbolize what
happens when people unite in the wrong direction, is that in Hogwarts
we should play Quidditch without the Snitch.”
“What?” screamed a hundred voices in the crowd, as Draco’s jaw
dropped.
“The Snitch ruins the whole game,” said Harry Potter. “Everything
the other players do ends up being irrelevant. It would make overwhelmingly more sense to just buy a clock. It’s one of those incredibly stupid
things you don’t notice just because you grew up with it, that people
only do because everyone else is doing it—”
But by that point Harry Potter’s voice could no longer be heard,
because the riot had started.
*

614

*

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS II

*
*

*

The riot ended around ﬁfteen seconds later, after a gigantic spout
of ﬁre blasted out of the highest tower of Hogwarts to the sound of a
hundred thunders. Draco hadn’t known Dumbledore could do that.
The students sat down again very carefully and quietly.
Professor Quirrell was laughing, without pause. “So be it, Mr. Potter. Your will be done.” The Defense Professor paused deliberately. “Of
course, I only promised one cunning plot. And that is all that the three
of you will get.”
Draco had been half-expecting the words earlier, but now they still
came as a shock; Draco exchanged rapid glances with Granger, they
would have been the obvious allies but their wishes were directly opposed—
“You mean,” said Harry, “we have to all agree on a wish?”
“Oh, that would be far too much to ask,” said Professor Quirrell.
“The three of you have no common enemy, do you?”
And for one brief moment, so fast that Draco thought he might have
imagined it, the Defense Professor’s eyes ﬂicked in the direction of Dumbledore.
“No,” said Professor Quirrell, “I mean that I shall grant all three of
your wishes using a single plot.”
There was a confused silence.
“You can’t do that,” Harry said ﬂatly from beside Draco. “Not even I
can do that. Two of those wishes are mutually incompatible. It’s logically
impossible—” and then Harry cut himself oﬀ.
“You’re a few years too young to tell me what I can’t do, Mr. Potter,”
said Professor Quirrell, with a brief dry smile.
Then the Defense Professor turned back to the watching students.
“Truthfully, I have no conﬁdence in your ability to learn this day’s lesson. Go home, and enjoy your time with your families, or what’s left
of them, while they still live. My own family is long since dead at the
Dark Lord’s hand. I shall see you all when classes resume.”
In the speechless silence that resulted, Professor Quirrell already
turning to walk oﬀ the stage, Draco heard the Defense Professor’s voice
say, quietly and no longer ampliﬁed, “But you, Mr. Potter, I would speak
to now.”
*

615

*

CHAPTER

THIRT Y-FI V E

COORDINATION
PROBLEMS, PART III
hey had gone to the Defense Professor’s oﬃce, and Professor Quirrell had sealed the door before he leaned back in his chair and
spoke.
The Defense Professor’s voice was very calm, and that unnerved
Harry a good deal more than if Professor Quirrell had been shouting.
“I am trying,” said Professor Quirrell quietly, “to make allowances
for the fact that you are young. That I myself, at the same age, was
a quite extraordinary fool. You speak with adult style and meddle in
adult games, and sometimes I forget that you are only a meddler. I hope,
Mr. Potter, that your childish meddling has not just killed you, ruined
your country, and lost the next war.”
It was very hard for Harry to control his breathing. “Professor Quirrell, I said a good deal less than I wished to say, but I had to say something. Your proposals are extremely alarming to anyone who has the
slightest familiarity with Muggle history over the last century. The Italian fascists, some very nasty people, got their name from the fasces, a bundle of rods bound together to symbolize the idea that unity is strength—”
“So the nasty Italian fascists believed that unity is stronger than division,” said Professor Quirrell. Sharpness was beginning to creep into
his voice. “Perhaps they also believed that the sky is blue, and advocated
a policy of not dropping rocks on your head.”
Reversed stupidity is not intelligence; the world’s stupidest person may
say the sun is shining, but that doesn’t make it dark out... “Fine, you’re

T

*

617

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

right, that was an ad hominem argument, it’s not wrong because the fascists said it. But Professor Quirrell, you can’t have everyone in a country
take the Mark of one dictator! It’s a single point of failure! Look, I’ll
put it this way. Suppose the enemy just Imperiuses whoever controls
the Mark—”
“Powerful wizards are not so easy to Imperius,” said Professor Quirrell dryly. “And if you cannot ﬁnd a worthy leader, you are in any case
doomed. But worthy leaders do exist; the question is whether the people
shall follow them.”
Harry raked his hands through his hair in frustration. He wanted
to call a time-out and make Professor Quirrell read The Rise and Fall
of the Third Reich and then start the conversation over again. “I don’t
suppose that if I suggested democracy was a better form of government
than dictatorship—”
“I see,” said Professor Quirrell. His eyes closed brieﬂy, then opened.
“Mr. Potter, the stupidity of Quidditch is transparent to you because you
did not grow up revering the game. If you had never heard of elections,
Mr. Potter, and you simply saw what is there, what you saw would not
please you. Look to our elected Minister of Magic. Is he the wisest, the
strongest, the greatest of our nation? No; he is a buﬀoon who is owned
in fee simple by Lucius Malfoy. Wizards went to the polls and chose between Cornelius Fudge and Tania Leach, who had competed with each
other in a grand and entertaining contest after the Daily Prophet, which
Lucius Malfoy also controls, decided that they were the only serious candidates. That Cornelius Fudge was genuinely selected as the best leader
our country could oﬀer is not a suggestion anyone could make with a
straight face. It is no diﬀerent in the Muggle world, from what I have
heard and seen; the last Muggle newspaper I read mentioned that the
previous President of the United States had been a retired movie actor.
If you had not grown up with elections, Mr. Potter, they would be as
transparently silly to you as Quidditch.”
Harry sat there with his mouth open, struggling for words. “The
point of elections isn’t to produce the one best leader, it’s to keep politicians scared enough of the voters that they don’t go completely evil like
dictators do—”
*

618

*

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS III

*
*

*

“The last war, Mr. Potter, was fought between the Dark Lord and
Dumbledore. And while Dumbledore was a ﬂawed leader who was
losing the war, it is ridiculous to suggest that any of the Ministers of
Magic elected during that period could have taken Dumbledore’s place!
Strength ﬂows from powerful wizards and their followers, not from elections and the fools they elect. That is the lesson of magical Britain’s recent history; and I doubt that the next war will teach you a lesson any
diﬀerent. If you survive it, Mr. Potter, which you will not do unless you
abandon the enthusiastic illusions of childhood!”
“If you think there are no dangers in the course of action you advocate,” said Harry, and despite everything his voice was growing sharp,
“then that, too, is childish enthusiasm.”
Harry stared grimly into Professor Quirrell’s eyes, who stared back
without blinking.
“Such dangers,” said Professor Quirrell coldly, “are to be discussed
in oﬃces like this one, not in speeches. The fools who elected Cornelius
Fudge are not interested in complications and caution. Present them
with anything more nuanced than a rousing cheer, and you will face
your war alone. That, Mr. Potter, was your childish error, which Draco
Malfoy would not have made even when he was eight years old. It should
have been obvious even to you that you should have stayed silent, and
consulted with me ﬁrst, not spoken your worries before the crowd!”
“I am no friend of Albus Dumbledore,” said Harry, a cold in his
voice to match Professor Quirrell’s. “But he is no child, and he did not
seem to think my concerns were childish, nor that I should have waited
to speak them.”
“Oh,” said Professor Quirrell, “so you take your cues from the Headmaster now, do you?” and stood up from behind his desk.

**
*
When Blaise turned the corner on the way to the oﬃce, he saw that
Professor Quirrell was already leaning against the wall.
*

619

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

“Blaise Zabini,” said the Defense Professor, straightening; his eyes
were set like dark stones within his face, and his voice sent a shiver of
fear down Blaise’s spine.
He can’t do anything against me, I just have to remember that—
“I believe,” said Professor Quirrell, in a clear, cold voice, “that I have
already guessed the name of your employer. But I would hear it from
your own lips, and tell me also the price that bought you.”
Blaise knew he was sweating under his robes, and that the moisture
would be already visible on his forehead. “I got a chance to show I was
better than all three generals, and I took it. A lot of people hate me now,
but there’re also plenty of Slytherins who’ll love me for it. What makes
you think I’m—”
“You did not devise the plan of today’s battle, Mr. Zabini. Tell me
who did.”
Blaise swallowed hard. “Well... I mean, in that case... then you already know who did, right? The only one who’s that crazy is Dumbledore. And he’ll protect me if you try to do anything.”
“Indeed. Tell me the price.” The Defense Professor’s eyes were still
hard.
“It’s my cousin Kimberly,” Blaise said, swallowing again and trying
to control his voice. “She’s real, and she’s really being bullied, Potter
checked that, he wasn’t dumb. Only Dumbledore said that he’d nudged
the bullies into doing it, just for the plan, and if I worked for him she’d
be ﬁne afterward, but if I did go with Potter, there was more trouble
Kimberly could get into!”
Professor Quirrell was silent for a long moment.
“I see,” Professor Quirrell said, his voice now much milder. “Mr. Zabini, should such an event occur again, you may contact me directly.
I have my own ways of protecting my friends. Now, a ﬁnal question:
Even with all the power you took into your hands, forcing a tie would
have been diﬃcult. Did Dumbledore instruct you as to who should win
otherwise?”
“Sunshine,” said Blaise.
Professor Quirrell nodded. “As I thought.” The Defense Professor
sighed. “In your future career, Mr. Zabini, I do not suggest trying any
*

620 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS III

*
*

*

plots that complicated. They have a tendency to fail.”
“Um, I said that to the Headmaster, actually,” Blaise said, “and he
said that was why it was important to have more than one plot going at
a time.”
Professor Quirrell passed a weary hand across his forehead. “It’s a
wonder the Dark Lord didn’t go mad from ﬁghting him. You may go
on to your meeting with the Headmaster, Mr. Zabini. I will say nothing
of this, but if the Headmaster should somehow discover that we have
spoken, remember my standing oﬀer to give you what protection I can.
You are dismissed.”
Blaise didn’t wait for any other word, just turned and ﬂed.

**
*
Professor Quirrell waited for a time, and then said, “Go ahead, Mr. Potter.”
Harry tore the Cloak of Invisibility oﬀ his head and stuﬀed into his
pouch. He was trembing with so much rage he could hardly speak. “He
what? He did what?”
“You should have deduced it yourself, Mr. Potter,” Professor Quirrell said mildly. “You must learn to blur your vision until you can see
the forest obscured by the trees. Anyone who heard the stories about
you, and who did not know that you were the mysterious Boy-WhoLived, could easily deduce your ownership of an invisibility cloak. Step
back from these events, blur away their details, and what do we observe?
There was a great rivalry between students, and their competition ended
in a perfect tie. That sort of thing only happens in stories, Mr. Potter,
and there is one person in this school who thinks in stories. There was
a strange and complicated plot, which you should have realized was uncharacteristic of the young Slytherin you faced. But there is a person in
this school who deals in plots that elaborate, and his name is not Zabini.
And I did warn you that there was a quadruple agent; you knew that
Zabini was at least a triple agent, and you should have guessed a high
*

621

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

chance that it was he. No, I will not declare the battle invalid. All three
of you failed the test, and lost to your common enemy.”
Harry didn’t care about tests at this point. “Dumbledore blackmailed
Zabini by threatening his cousin? Just to make our battle end in a tie?
Why?”
Professor Quirrell gave a mirthless laugh. “Perhaps the Headmaster
thought the rivalry was good for his pet hero and wished to see it continue. For the greater good, you understand. Or perhaps he was simply
mad. You see, Mr. Potter, everyone knows that Dumbledore’s madness
is a mask, that he is sane pretending to be insane. They pride themselves
on that clever insight, and knowing the secret explanation, they stop
looking. It does not occur to them that it is also possible to have a mask
behind the mask, to be insane pretending to be sane pretending to be insane. And I am afraid, Mr. Potter, that I have urgent business elsewhere,
and must depart; but I should strongly advise you not to take your cues
from Albus Dumbledore when ﬁghting a war. Until later, Mr. Potter.”
And the Defense Professor inclined his head with some irony, and
then strode oﬀ in the same direction Zabini had ﬂed, while Harry was
still standing in open-mouthed shock.
Aftermath: Harry Potter.
Harry trudged slowly toward the Ravenclaw dorm, eyes unseeing of
walls, paintings, or other students; he went up stairs and down ramps
without slowing, speeding, or noticing where he trod.
It had taken him more than a minute after Professor Quirrell’s departure to realize that his only source of information about Dumbledore
being involved was (a) Blaise Zabini, who he would have to be an absolute gaping idiot to trust again, and (b) Professor Quirrell, who could
have easily faked a plot in Dumbledore’s style, and who might also think
that a little student rivalry was a ﬁne thing; and who had, if you stepped
back and blurred out the details, just proposed turning the country into
a magical dictatorship.
And it was also possible that Dumbledore was the one behind Zabini,
and that Professor Quirrell had been sincerely trying to ﬁght the Dark
*

622 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS III

*
*

*

Mark in kind, and prevent the repetition of a performance he saw as
pathetic. Trying to make sure that Harry didn’t end up ﬁghting the
Dark Lord alone, while everyone else hid, frightened, trying to stay out
of the line of ﬁre, waiting for Harry to save them.
But the truth was...
Well...
Harry was sort of okay with that.
It was, he knew, the kind of thing that was supposed to make heroes
resentful and bitter.
To heck with that. Harry was very much in favor of everyone else
staying out of danger while the Boy-Who-Lived took down the Dark Lord
by himself, plus or minus a small number of companions. If the next
conﬂict with the Dark Lord got to the point of a Second Wizarding War
that killed lots of people and embroiled a whole country, that would
mean Harry had already failed.
And if afterward a war broke out between wizards and Muggles, it
didn’t matter who won, Harry would have already failed by letting it
get that far. Besides, who said the societies couldn’t peacefully integrate
when the secrecy inevitably broke down? (Though Harry could hear
Professor Quirrell’s dry voice in his mind, asking him if he was a fool,
and saying all the obvious things...) And if mages and Muggles couldn’t
live in peace, then Harry would combine magic and science and ﬁgure
out how to evacuate all the wizards to Mars or somewhere, instead of
letting a war break out.
Because if it did come down to a war of extermination...
That was the thing Professor Quirrell hadn’t realized, the one most
important question he’d forgotten to ask his young general.
The real reason why Harry had no intention of being argued into
endorsing a Light Mark, no matter how much it would help him in his
ﬁght against the Dark Lord.
One Dark Lord and ﬁfty Marked followers had been a peril to all of
magical Britain.
If all Britain took the Mark of a strong leader, they would be a peril
to the whole magical world.
And if the whole wizarding world took a single Mark, they would
*

623 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

be a danger to the rest of humanity.
No one knew quite how many wizards there were in the world. He’d
done a few estimates with Hermione and come up with numbers in the
rough range of a million.
But there were six billion Muggles.
If it came down to a ﬁnal war...
Professor Quirrell had forgotten to ask Harry which side he would
protect.
A scientiﬁc civilization, reaching outward, looking upward, knowing that its destiny was to grasp the stars.
And a magical civilization, slowly fading as knowledge was lost, still
governed by a nobility that saw Muggles as not quite human.
It was a terribly sad feeling, but not one that held any hint of doubt.

Aftermath: Blaise Zabini.
Blaise strolled through the hallways with careful, self-imposed slowness, his heart beating wildly as he tried to calm down—
“Ahem,” said a dry, whispering voice from a shadowy alcove as he
passed.
Blaise jumped, but he didn’t scream.
Slowly, he turned.
In that small, shadowy corner was a black cloak so wide and billowing that it was impossible to determine whether the ﬁgure beneath was
male or female, and atop the cloak a broad-brimmed black hat, and a
black mist seemed to gather beneath it and obscure the face of whoever
or whatever might lie beneath.
“Report,” whispered Mr. Hat and Cloak.
“I said just what you told me to,” said Blaise. His voice was a little
calmer now that he wasn’t lying to anyone. “And Professor Quirrell
reacted just the way you expected.”
The broad black hat tilted and straightened, as though the head below
had nodded. “Excellent,” said the unidentiﬁable whisper. “The reward I
promised you is already on its way to your mother, by owl.”
*

624 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS III

*
*

*

Blaise hesitated, but his curiosity was eating him alive. “Can I ask
now why you want to cause trouble between Professor Quirrell and
Dumbledore?” The Headmaster hadn’t had anything to do with the
Gryﬃndor bullies that Blaise knew about, and besides helping Kimberly, the Headmaster had also oﬀered to make Professor Binns give
him excellent marks in History of Magic even if he turned in blank
parchments for his homework, though he’d still have to attend class and
pretend to hand them in. Actually Blaise would have betrayed all three
generals for free, and never mind his cousin either, but he’d seen no need
to say that.
The broad black hat cocked to one side, as if to convey a quizzical
stare. “Tell me, friend Blaise, did it occur to you that traitors who betray
so many times over often meet with ill ends?”
“Nope,” said Blaise, looking straight into the black mist under the
hat. “Everyone knows that nothing really bad ever happens to students
in Hogwarts.”
Mr. Hat and Cloak gave a whispery chuckle. “Indeed,” said the whisper. “With the murder of one student ﬁve decades ago being the exception that proves the rule, since Salazar Slytherin would have keyed his
monster into the ancient wards at a higher level than the Headmaster
himself.”
Blaise stared at the black mist, now beginning to feel a little uneasy.
But it ought to take a Hogwarts professor to do anything signiﬁcant to
him without setting oﬀ alarms. Quirrell and Snape were the only professors who’d do something like this, and Quirrell wouldn’t care about
fooling himself, and Snape wouldn’t hurt one of his own Slytherins...
would he?
“No, friend Blaise,” whispered the black mist, “I only wished to advise you never to try anything like this in your adult life. So many betrayals would certainly lead to at least one vengeance.”
“My mother never got any vengeances,” said Blaise proudly. “Even
though she married seven husbands and every single one of them died
mysteriously and left her lots of money.”
“Really?” said the whisper. “However did she persuade the seventh
to marry her after he heard what happened to the ﬁrst six?”
*

625 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

“I asked Mum that,” said Blaise, “and she said I couldn’t know until
I was old enough, and I asked her how old was old enough, and she said,
older than her.”
Again the whispery chuckle. “Well then, friend Blaise, my congratulations on having followed in your mother’s footsteps. Go, and if you
say nothing of this, we will not meet again.”
Blaise backed uneasily away, feeling an odd reluctance to turn his
back.
The hat tilted. “Oh, come now, little Slytherin. If you were truly the
equal of Harry Potter or Draco Malfoy, you would have already realized
that my hinted threats were just to ensure your silence before Albus.
Had I intended to harm, I would not have hinted; had I said nothing,
then you should have worried.”
Blaise straightened, feeling a little insulted, and nodded to Mr. Hat
and Cloak; then turned decisively and strode oﬀ toward his meeting with
the Headmaster.
He’d been hoping to the very end that someone else would show up
and give him a chance to sell out Mr. Hat and Cloak.
But then Mum hadn’t betrayed seven diﬀerent husbands at the same
time. When you looked at it that way, he was still doing better than her.
And Blaise Zabini went on walking toward the Headmaster’s oﬃce,
smiling, content to be a quintuple agent—
For a moment the boy stumbled, but then straightened, shaking oﬀ
the odd feeling of disorientation.
And Blaise Zabini went on walking toward the Headmaster’s oﬃce,
smiling, content to be a quadruple agent.
Aftermath: Hermione Granger.
The messenger didn’t approach her until she was alone.
Hermione was just leaving the girl’s bathroom where she sometimes
hid to think, and a bright shining cat leaped out of nowhere and said,
“Miss Granger?”
She let out a little shriek before she realized the cat had spoken in
Professor McGonagall’s voice.
*

626 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS III

*
*

*

Even so she hadn’t been frightened, only startled; the cat was bright
and brilliant and beautiful, glowing with a white silver radiance like
moon-colored sunlight, and she couldn’t imagine being scared.
“What are you?” said Hermione.
“This is a message from Professor McGonagall,” said the cat, still in
the Professor’s voice. “Can you come to my oﬃce, and not speak of this
to anyone?”
“I’ll be there right away,” said Hermione, still surprised, and the cat
leaped and vanished; only it didn’t vanish, it traveled away somehow; or
that was what her mind said, even though her eyes just saw it disappear.
By the time Hermione had got to the oﬃce of her favorite professor,
her mind was all a-whirl with speculations. Was there something wrong
with her Transﬁguration scores? But then why would Professor McGonagall say not to tell anyone? It was probably about Harry practicing
his partial Transﬁguration...
Professor McGonagall’s face looked worried, not stern, as Hermione
seated herself in front of the desk—trying to keep her eyes from going to
the nest of cubbyholes containing Professor McGonagall’s homework,
she’d always wondered what sort of work grownups had to do to keep
the school running and whether they could use any help from her—
“Miss Granger,” said Professor McGonagall, “let me start by saying that I already know about the Headmaster asking you to make that
wish—”
“He told you?” blurted Hermione in startlement. The Headmaster
had said no one else was supposed to know!
Professor McGonagall paused, looked at Hermione, and gave a sad
little chuckle. “It’s good to see Mr. Potter hasn’t corrupted you too
much. Miss Granger, you aren’t supposed to admit anything just because I say I know. As it happens, the Headmaster did not tell me, I
simply know him too well.”
Hermione was blushing furiously now.
“It’s ﬁne, Miss Granger!” said Professor McGonagall hastily. “You’re
a Ravenclaw in your ﬁrst year, nobody expects you to be a Slytherin.”
That really stung.
“Fine,” said Hermione with some acerbity, “I’ll go ask Harry Potter
*

627 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

for Slytherin lessons, then.”
“That wasn’t what I wanted to...” said Professor McGonagall, and
her voice trailed oﬀ. “Miss Granger, I’m worried about this because
young Ravenclaw girls shouldn’t have to be Slytherins! If the Headmaster asks you to get involved in something you’re not comfortable with,
Miss Granger, it really is all right to say no. And if you’re feeling pressured, please tell the Headmaster that you would like me to be there, or
that you would like to ask me ﬁrst.”
Hermione’s eyes were very wide. “Does the Headmaster do things
that are wrong?”
Professor McGonagall looked a little sad at that. “Not on purpose,
Miss Granger, but I think... well, it probably is true that sometimes the
Headmaster has trouble remembering what it’s like to be a child. Even
when he was a child, I’m sure he must have been brilliant, and strong of
mind and heart, with courage enough for three Gryﬃndors. Sometimes
the Headmaster asks too much of his young students, Miss Granger, or
isn’t careful enough not to hurt them. He is a good man, but sometimes
his plotting can go too far.”
“But it’s good for students to be strong and have courage,” said Hermione. “That’s why you suggested Gryﬃndor for me, wasn’t it?”
Professor McGonagall smiled wryly. “Perhaps I was only being selfish, wanting you for my own House. Did the Sorting Hat oﬀer you—
no, I should not have asked.”
“It told me I might go anywhere but Slytherin,” said Hermione, “at
least in the beginning.” She’d almost asked why she wasn’t good enough
for Slytherin, before she’d managed to stop herself... “So I have courage,
Professor!”
Professor McGonagall leaned forward over her desk. The worry was
showing plainer on her face now. “Miss Granger, it’s not about courage,
it’s about what’s healthy for young girls! The Headmaster is drawing
you into his plots, Harry Potter is giving you his secrets to keep, and
now you’re making alliances with Draco Malfoy! And I promised your
mother that you would be safe at Hogwarts!”
Hermione just didn’t know what to say to that. But the thought
was occurring to her that Professor McGonagall might not have been
*

628 *

**
*

COORDINATION PROBLEMS III

*
*

*

warning her if she’d been a boy in Gryﬃndor instead of a girl in Ravenclaw and that was, well... “I’ll try to be good,” she said, “and I won’t let
anyone tell me otherwise.”
Professor McGonagall pressed her hands over her eyes. When she
took them away, her lined face looked very old. “Yes,” she said in a
whisper, “you would have done well in my House. Stay safe, Miss Granger, and be careful. And if you are ever worried or uncomfortable about
anything, please come to me at once. I won’t keep you any longer.”
Aftermath: Draco Malfoy.
Neither of them really wanted to do anything complicated that Saturday, not after ﬁghting a battle earlier. So Draco was just sitting in an
unused classroom and trying to read a book called Thinking Physics. It
was one of the most fascinating things that Draco had ever read in his
life, at least the parts he could understand, at least when the accursed idiot who refused to let his books out of his sight could manage to shut up
and let Draco concentrate—
“Hermione Granger is a muuudbloood,” sang Harry Potter from
where he sat at a nearby desk, reading a far more advanced book of his
own.
“I know what you’re trying to do,” said Draco calmly without looking up from the pages. “It’s not going to work. We’re still ganging up
and crushing you.”
“A Maaaalfoy is working with a muuudblood, what will all your father’s frieeeends think—”
“They’ll think Malfoys aren’t as easily manipulated as you seem to
believe, Potter!”
The Defense Professor was crazier than Dumbledore, no future
saviour of the world could ever be this childish and undigniﬁed at any
age.
“Hey, Draco, you know what’s really going to suck? You know that
Hermione Granger has two copies of the magical allele, just like you
and just like me, but all your classmates in Slytherin don’t know that
and yooouuu’re not allowed to explaaaaain—”
*

629 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

Draco’s ﬁngers were whitening where they gripped the book. Being
beaten and spat upon couldn’t possibly require this much self-control,
and if he didn’t get back at Harry soon, he was going to do something
incriminating—
“So what did you wish for the ﬁrst time?” said Draco.
Harry didn’t say anything, so Draco looked up from his book, and
felt a twinge of malicious satisfaction at the sad look on Harry’s face.
“Um,” Harry said. “A lot of people asked me that, but I don’t think
Professor Quirrell would have wanted me to talk about it.”
Draco put a serious look on his own face. “You can talk about it with
me. It’s probably not important compared to the other secrets you’ve
told me, and what else are friends for?” That’s right, I’m your friend! Feel
guilty!
“It wasn’t really all that interesting,” Harry said with obviously artiﬁcial lightness. “Just, I wish Professor Quirrell would teach Battle Magic
again next year.”
Harry sighed, and looked back down at his book.
And said, after another few seconds, “Your father’s probably going
to be pretty upset with you this Christmas, but if you promise him that
you’ll betray the mudblood girl and wipe out her army, everything will
go back to being all right, and you’ll still get your Christmas presents.”
Draco calmly closed his fascinating book, stood up, and walked out
of the classroom. From behind him, Draco heard a call of “Wait, Draco,
I’m sorry—” but it was much too late for that.
Maybe if he and Granger asked Professor Quirrell extra politely and
used some of their Quirrell points, the two of them would be allowed
to do something more interesting to General Chaos than putting him to
sleep.

*

630 *

CHAPTER

THIRT Y-SIX

STATUS DIFFERENTIALS
renching disorientation, that was how it felt to walk out of
Platform Nine and Three-Quarters into the rest of Earth, the
world that Harry had once thought was the only real world. People
dressed in casual shirts and pants, instead of the more digniﬁed robes
of wizards and witches. Scattered bits of trash here and there around
the benches. A forgotten smell, the fumes of burned gasoline, raw and
sharp in the air. The ambiance of the King’s Cross train station, less
bright and cheerful than Hogwarts or Diagon Alley; the people seemed
smaller, more afraid, and likely would have eagerly traded their problems for a dark wizard to ﬁght. Harry wanted to cast Scourgify for the
dirt, and Everto for the garbage, and if he’d known the spell, a BubbleHead Charm so he wouldn’t have to breathe the air. But he couldn’t use
his wand, in this place...
This, Harry realized, must be what it felt like to go from a First
World country to a Third World country.
Only it was the Zeroth World which Harry had left, the wizarding world, of Cleansing Charms and house elves; where, between the
healer’s arts and your own magic, you could hit one hundred and seventy before old age really started catching up with you.
And nonmagical London, Muggle Earth, to which Harry had temporarily returned. This was where Mum and Dad would live out the rest
of their lives, unless technology leapfrogged over wizardry’s quality of
life, or something deeper in the world changed.
Without even thinking about it, Harry’s head turned and his eyes
darted behind him to see the wooden trunk that was scurrying after

W

*

631

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-SIX

*
*

*

him, unnoticed by any Muggles, the clawed tentacles oﬀering quick conﬁrmation that, yes, he hadn’t just imagined it all...
And then there was the other reason for the tight feeling in his chest.
His parents didn’t know.
They didn’t know anything.
They didn’t know...
“Harry?” called a thin, blonde woman whose perfectly smooth and
unblemished skin made her look a good deal younger than thirty-three;
and Harry realized with a start that it was magic, he hadn’t known the
signs before but he could see them now. And whatever sort of potion
lasted that long, it must have been terribly dangerous, because most
witches didn’t do that to themselves, they weren’t that desperate...
There was water gathering in Harry’s eyes.
“Harry?” yelled an older-looking man with a paunch gathering about
his stomach, dressed with ostentatious academic carelessness in a black
vest thrown over a dark grey-green shirt, someone who would always be
a professor anywhere he went, who would certainly have been one of
the most brilliant wizards of his generation, if he’d been born with two
copies of that gene, instead of zero...
Harry raised his hand and waved to them. He couldn’t speak. He
couldn’t speak at all.
They came over to him, not running, but at a steady, digniﬁed walk;
that was how fast Professor Michael Verres-Evans walked, and Mrs. Petunia Evans-Verres wasn’t about to walk any faster.
The smile on his father’s face wasn’t very wide, but then his father
never was given to huge smiles; it was, at least, as wide as Harry had
ever seen it, wider than when a new grant came in, or when one of his
students got a position, and you couldn’t ask for a wider smile than that.
Mum was blinking hard, and she was trying to smile but not doing
a very good job.
“So!” said his father as he came striding up. “Made any revolutionary
discoveries yet?”
Of course Dad thought he was joking.
It hadn’t hurt quite so much when his parents didn’t believe in him,
back when no one else had believed in him either, back when Harry
*

632 *

**
*

STATUS DIFFERENTIALS

*
*

*

hadn’t known how it felt to be taken seriously by people like Headmaster
Dumbledore and Professor Quirrell.
And that was when Harry realized that the Boy-Who-Lived only existed in magical Britain, that there wasn’t any such person in Muggle
London, just a cute little eleven-year-old boy going home for Christmas.
“Excuse me,” Harry said, his voice trembling, “I’m going to break
down and cry now, it doesn’t mean there was anything wrong at school.”
Harry started to move forward, and then stopped, torn between hugging his father and hugging his mother, he didn’t want either one to feel
slighted or that Harry loved them more than the other—
“You,” said his father, “are a very silly boy, Mr. Verres,” and he gently took Harry by the shoulders and pushed him into the arms of his
mother, who was kneeling down, tears already streaking her cheek.
“Hello, Mum,” Harry said with his voice wavering, “I’m back.”
And he hugged her, amid the noisy mechanical sounds and the smell of
burned gasoline; and Harry started crying, because he knew that nothing could go back, least of all him.

**
*
The sky was completely dark, and stars were coming out, by the time
they negotiated the Christmas traﬃc to the university town that was Oxford, and parked in the driveway of the small, dingy-looking old house
that their family used to keep the rain oﬀ their books.
As they walked up the brief stretch of pavement leading to the front
door, they passed a series of ﬂower-pots holding small, dim electric lights
(dim since they had to recharge themselves oﬀ solar power during the
day), and the lights lit up just as they passed. The hard part had been
ﬁnding motion sensors that were waterproof and triggered at just the
right distance...
In Hogwarts there were real torches like that.
And then the front door opened and Harry stepped into their livingroom, blinking hard.
*

633 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-SIX

*
*

*

Every inch of wall space is covered by a bookcase. Each bookcase has six
shelves, going almost to the ceiling. Some bookshelves are stacked to the brim
with hardcover books: science, math, history, and everything else. Other
shelves have two layers of paperback science ﬁction, with the back layer of
books propped up on old tissue boxes or two-by-fours, so that you can see the
back layer of books above the books in front. And it still isn’t enough. Books
are overﬂowing onto the tables and the sofas and making little heaps under
the windows...
The Verres household was just as he’d left it, only with more books,
which was also just how he’d left it.
And a Christmas tree, naked and undecorated just two days before
Christmas Eve, which threw Harry brieﬂy before he realized, with a
warm feeling blossoming in his chest, that of course his parents had
waited.
“We took the bed out of your room to make room for more bookcases,” said his father. “You can sleep in your trunk, right?”
“You can sleep in my trunk,” said Harry.
“That reminds me,” said his father. “What did they end up doing
about your sleep cycle?”
“Magic,” Harry said, making a beeline for the door that opened upon
his bedroom, just in case Dad wasn’t joking...
“That’s not an explanation!” said Professor Verres-Evans, just as
Harry shouted, “You used up all the open space on my bookcases?”

**
*
Harry had spent the 23rd of December shopping for Muggle things that
he couldn’t just Transﬁgure; his father had been busy and had said that
Harry would need to walk or take the bus, which had suited Harry just
ﬁne. Some of the people at the hardware store had given Harry questioning looks, but he’d said with an innocent voice that his father was
shopping nearby and was very busy and had sent him to get some things
(holding up a list in carefully adult-looking half-illegible handwriting);
and in the end, money was money.
*

634 *

**
*

STATUS DIFFERENTIALS

*
*

*

They had all decorated the Christmas tree together, and Harry had
put a tiny dancing fairy on top (two Sickles, ﬁve Knuts at Gambol &
Japes).
Gringotts had readily exchanged Galleons for paper money, but they
didn’t seem to have any simple way to turn larger quantities of gold into
tax-free, unsuspicious Muggle money in a numbered Swiss bank account.
This had rather spiked Harry’s plan to turn most of the money he’d
self-stolen into a sensible mix of 60% international index funds and 40%
Berkshire Hathaway. For the moment, Harry had diversiﬁed his assets
a little further by sneaking out late at night, invisible and Time-Turned,
and burying one hundred golden Galleons in the backyard. He’d always
always always wanted to do that anyway.
Some of December 24th had been spent with the Professor reading
Harry’s books and asking questions. Most of the experiments his father
had suggested were impractical, at least for the moment; of those remaining, Harry had done many of them already. (“Yes, Dad, I checked what
happened if Hermione was given a changed pronunciation and she didn’t
know whether it was changed, that was the very ﬁrst experiment I did,
Dad!”)
The last question Harry’s father had asked, looking up from Magical Draughts and Potions with an expression of bewildered disgust, was
whether it all made sense if you were a wizard; and Harry had answered
no.
Whereupon his father had declared that magic was unscientiﬁc.
Harry was still a little shocked at the idea of pointing to a section of
reality and calling it unscientiﬁc. Dad seemed to think that the conﬂict
between his intuitions and the universe meant that the universe had a
problem.
(Then again, there were lots of physicists who thought that quantum
mechanics was weird, instead of quantum mechanics being normal and
them being weird.)
Harry had shown his mother the healer’s kit he’d bought to keep in
their house, though most of the potions wouldn’t work on Dad. Mum
had stared at the kit in a way that made Harry ask whether Mum’s sister
had ever bought anything like that for Grandpa Edwin and Grandma
*

635 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-SIX

*
*

*

Elaine. And when Mum still hadn’t answered, Harry had said hastily
that she must have just never thought of it. And then, ﬁnally, he’d ﬂed
the room.
Lily Evans probably hadn’t thought of it, that was the sad thing.
Harry knew that other people had a tendency to not-think about painful
subjects, in the same way they had a tendency not to deliberately rest
their hands on red-hot stove burners; and Harry was starting to suspect
that most Muggleborns rapidly acquired a tendency to not-think about
their family, who were all going to die before they reached their ﬁrst
century anyway.
Not that Harry had any intention of letting that happen, of course.
And then it was late in the day on December 24th and they were
driving oﬀ for their Christmas Eve dinner.

**
*
The house was huge, not by Hogwarts standards, but certainly by the
standards of what you could get if your father was a distinguished professor trying to live in Oxford. Two stories of brick gleaming in the setting
sun, with windows on top of windows and one tall window that went up
much further than glass should go, that was going to be one huge living
room...
Harry took a deep breath, and rang the doorbell.
There was a distant call of “Honey, can you get it?”
This was followed by a slow patter of approaching steps.
And then the door opened to reveal a genial man, of fat and rosy
cheeks and thinning hair, in a blue button-down shirt straining slightly
at the seams.
“Dr. Granger?” Harry’s father said briskly, before Harry could even
speak. “I’m Michael, and this is Petunia and our son Harry. The food’s
in the magical trunk,” and Dad made a vague gesture behind him—not
quite in the direction of the trunk, as it happened.
“Yes, please, come in,” said Leo Granger. He stepped forward and
took the wine bottle from the Professor’s outstretched hands, with a
*

636 *

**
*

STATUS DIFFERENTIALS

*
*

*

muttered “Thank you,” and then stepped back and waved at the living
room. “Have a seat. And,” his head turning down to address Harry, “all
the toys are downstairs in the basement, I’m sure Herm will be down
shortly, it’s the ﬁrst door on your right,” and pointed toward a hallway.
Harry just looked at him for a moment, conscious that he was blocking his parents from coming in.
“Toys?” said Harry in a bright, high-pitched voice, with his eyes
wide. “I love toys!”
There was an intake of breath from his mother behind him, and
Harry strode into the house, managing not to stomp too hard as he
walked.
The living room was every bit as large as it had looked from outside,
with a huge vaulted ceiling dangling a gigantic chandelier, and a Christmas tree that must have been murder to maneuver through the door.
The lower levels of the tree were thoroughly and carefully decorated in
neat patterns of red and green and gold, with a newfound sprinkling of
blue and bronze; the heights that only a grownup could reach were carelessly, randomly draped with strings of lights and wreaths of tinsel. A
hallway extended until it terminated in the cabinetry of a kitchen, and
wooden stairs with polished metal railings stretched up toward a second
ﬂoor.
“Gosh!” Harry said. “This is a big house! I hope I don’t get lost in
here!”

**
*
Dr. Roberta Granger was feeling rather nervous as dinner approached.
The turkey and the roast, their own contributions to the common
project, were steadily cooking away in the oven; the other dishes were
to be brought by their guests, the Verres family, who had adopted a boy
named Harry. Who was known to the wizarding world as the Boy-WhoLived. And who was also the only boy that Hermione had ever called
“cute”, or noticed at all, really.
*

637 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-SIX

*
*

*

The Verreses had said that Hermione was the only child in Harry’s
age group whose existence their son had ever acknowledged in any way
whatsoever.
And it might’ve been jumping the gun just a little; but both couples
had a sneaking suspicion that wedding bells might be in the oﬃng a few
years down the road.
So while Christmas Day would be spent, as always, with her husband’s family, they’d decided to spend Christmas Eve meeting their
daughter’s possible future in-laws.
The doorbell rang while she was right in the middle of basting the
turkey, and she raised her voice and shouted, “Honey, can you get it?”
There was a brief groan of a chair and its occupant, and then there
was the sound of her husband’s heavy footsteps and the door swinging
open.
“Dr. Granger?” said an older man’s brisk voice. “I’m Michael, and
this is Petunia and our son Harry. The food’s in the magical trunk.”
“Yes, please, come in,” said her husband, followed by a muttered
“Thank you” that indicated some sort of present had been accepted, and
“Have a seat.” Then Leo’s voice altered to a tone of artiﬁcial enthusiasm,
and said, “And all the toys are downstairs in the basement, I’m sure Herm
will be down shortly, it’s the ﬁrst door on your right.”
There was a brief pause.
Then a young boy’s bright voice said, “Toys? I love toys!”
There was the sound of footsteps entering the house, and then the
same bright voice said, “Gosh! This is a big house! I hope I don’t get
lost in here!”
Roberta closed up the oven, smiling. She’d been a bit worried about
the way Hermione’s letters had described the Boy-Who-Lived—though
certainly her daughter hadn’t said anything indicating that Harry Potter
was dangerous; nothing like the dark hints written in the books Roberta
had bought, supposedly for Hermione, during their trip to Diagon Alley. Her daughter hadn’t said much at all, only that Harry talked like he
came out of a book, and Hermione was studying harder than she ever
had in her life just to stay ahead of him in class. But from the sound of
it, Harry Potter was an ordinary eleven-year-old boy.
*

638 *

**
*

STATUS DIFFERENTIALS

*
*

*

She got to the front door just as her daughter came clattering frantically down the stairs at a speed that didn’t look safe at all, Hermione
had claimed that witches were more resistant to falls but Roberta wasn’t
quite sure she believed that—
Roberta took in her ﬁrst sight of Professor and Mrs. Verres, who
were both looking rather nervous, just as the boy with the legendary scar
on his forehead turned to her daughter and said, now in a lower voice,
“Well met on this fairest of evenings, Miss Granger.” His hand stretched
back, as though oﬀering his parents on a silver platter. “I present to you
my father, Professor Michael Verres-Evans, and my mother, Mrs. Petunia
Evans-Verres.”
And as Roberta’s mouth was gaping open, the boy turned back to
his parents and said, now in that bright voice again, “Mum, Dad, this is
Hermione! She’s really smart!”
“Harry!” hissed her daughter. “Stop that!”
The boy swiveled again to regard Hermione. “I’m afraid, Miss Granger,” the boy said gravely, “that you and I have been exiled to the
labyrinthine recesses of the basement. Let us leave them to their adult
conversations, which would no doubt soar far above our own childish intellects, and resume our ongoing discussion of the implications of
Humean projectivism for Transﬁguration.”
“Excuse us, please,” said her daughter in a very ﬁrm tone, and
grabbed the boy by his left sleeve, and dragged him into the hallway—
Roberta swiveled helplessly to track them as they went past her, the boy
gave her a cheery wave—and then Hermione pulled the boy into the
basement access and slammed the door behind her.
“I, ah, I apologize for...” said Mrs. Verres in a faltering voice.
“I’m sorry,” said the Professor, smiling fondly, “Harry can be a bit
touchy about that sort of thing. But I expect he’s right about us not
being interested in their conversation.”
Is he dangerous? Roberta wanted to ask, but she kept her silence and
tried to think of subtler questions. Her husband beside her was chuckling, as if he’d found what they’d just seen funny, rather than frightening.
The most terrible Dark Lord in history had tried to kill that boy,
and the burnt husk of his body had been found next to the crib.
*

639 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-SIX

*
*

*

Her possible future son-in-law.
Roberta had been increasingly apprehensive about giving her daughter over to witchcraft—especially after she’d read the books, put the dates
together, and realized that her magical mother had probably been killed
at the height of Grindelwald’s terror, not died giving birth to her as her
father had always claimed. But Professor McGonagall had made other
visits after her ﬁrst trip, to “see how Miss Granger is doing”; and Roberta
couldn’t help but think that if Hermione said her parents were being
troublesome about her witching career, something would be done to ﬁx
them...
Roberta put her best smile on her face, and did what she could to
spread some pretended Christmas cheer.

**
*
The dining room table was much longer than six people—er, four people
and two children—really needed, but all of it was draped with a tablecloth of ﬁne white linen, and the dishes had been needlessly transferred
to fancy serving plates, which at least were of stainless steel rather than
real silver.
Harry was having a bit of trouble concentrating on the turkey.
The conversation had turned to Hogwarts, naturally; and it’d been
obvious to Harry that his parents were hoping that Hermione would
trip up and say more about Harry’s school life than Harry had been
telling them. And either Hermione had realized this, or she was just
automatically steering clear of anything that might prove troublesome.
So Harry was ﬁne.
But unfortunately Harry had made the mistake of owling his parents with all sorts of facts about Hermione that she hadn’t told her own
parents.
Like that she was general of an army in their after-school activities.
Hermione’s mother had looked very alarmed, and Harry had
quickly interrupted and done his best to explain that all the spells were
stunners, Professor Quirrell was always watching, and the existence of
*

640 *

**
*

STATUS DIFFERENTIALS

*
*

*

magical healing meant that lots of things were much less dangerous than
they sounded, at which point Hermione had kicked him hard under the
table. Thankfully Harry’s father, who Harry had to admit was better
than him at some things, had announced with ﬁrm professorial authority that he hadn’t worried at all, since he couldn’t imagine children being
allowed to do it if it was dangerous.
That wasn’t why Harry was having trouble enjoying dinner, though.
...the problem with feeling sorry for yourself was that it never took
any time at all to ﬁnd someone else who had it worse.
Dr. Leo Granger had asked, at one point, whether that nice teacher
who’d seemed to like Hermione, Professor McGonagall, was awarding
her lots of points in school.
Hermione had said yes, with an apparently genuine smile.
Harry had managed, with some eﬀort, to stop himself from icily
pointing out that Professor McGonagall would never show favoritism
to any Hogwarts student, and that Hermione was getting lots of points
because she’d earned every, single, one.
At another point, Leo Granger had oﬀered the table his opinion that
Hermione was very smart and could have gone to medical school and
become a dentist, if not for the whole witch business.
Hermione had smiled again, and a quick glance had prevented Harry
from suggesting Hermione might also have been an internationally famous scientist, and asking whether that thought would’ve occurred to
the Grangers if they’d had a son instead of a daughter, or if it was unacceptable either way for their oﬀspring to do better than them.
But Harry was rapidly reaching his boiling point.
And becoming a lot more appreciative of the fact that his own father
had always done everything he could to support Harry’s development as
a prodigy and always encouraged him to reach higher and never belittled
a single one of his accomplishments, even if a child prodigy was still just
a child. Was this the sort of household he could have ended up in, if
Mum had married Vernon Dursley?
Harry was doing what he could, though.
“And she’s really beating you in all your classes except broomstick
riding and Transﬁguration?” said Professor Michael Verres-Evans.
*

641

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-SIX

*
*

*

“Yes,” Harry said with forced calm, as he cut himself another bite of
Christmas Eve turkey. “By solid margins, in most of them.” There were
other circumstances under which Harry would have been more reluctant
to admit that, which was why he hadn’t gotten around to telling his
father until now.
“Hermione has always been quite good in school,” said Dr. Leo
Granger in a satisﬁed tone.
“Harry competes at the national level!” said Professor Michael
Verres-Evans.
“Dear!” said Petunia.
Hermione was giggling, and that wasn’t making Harry feel any better
about her situation. It didn’t seem to bother Hermione and that bothered
Harry.
“I’m not embarrassed to lose to her, Dad,” Harry said. Right at this
moment he wasn’t. “Did I mention that she memorized all her schoolbooks before the ﬁrst day of class? And yes, I tested it.”
“Is that, ah, usual for her?” Professor Verres-Evans said to the
Grangers.
“Oh, yes, Hermione’s always memorizing things,” said Dr. Roberta
Granger with a cheerful smile. “She knows every recipe in all my cookbooks by heart. I miss her every time I make dinner.”
Judging by the look on his father’s face, Dad was feeling at least some
of what Harry felt.
“Don’t worry, Dad,” Harry said, “she’s getting all the advanced material she can take, now. Her teachers at Hogwarts know she’s smart,
unlike her parents!”
His voice had risen on the last three words, and even as all faces
turned to stare at him and Hermione kicked him again, Harry knew
that he’d blown it, but it was too much, just way too much.
“Of course we know she’s smart,” said Leo Granger, starting to look
oﬀended at the child who’d had the temerity to raise his voice at their
dinner table.
“You don’t have the tiniest idea,” said Harry, the ice now leaking
into his voice. “You think she reads a lot of books and it’s cute, right?
You see a perfect report card and you think it’s good that she’s doing
*

642 *

**
*

STATUS DIFFERENTIALS

*
*

*

well in class. Your daughter is the most talented witch of her generation
and the brightest star of Hogwarts, and someday, Dr. and Dr. Granger,
the fact that you were her parents will be the only reason that history
remembers you!”
Hermione, who had calmly got up from her seat and walked around
the table, chose that moment to grab Harry’s shirt by the shoulder and
pull him out of his chair. Harry let himself be pulled, but as Hermione
dragged him away, he said, raising his voice even louder, “It is entirely
possible that in a thousand years, the fact that Hermione Granger’s parents were dentists will be the only reason anyone remembers dentistry!”

**
*
Roberta stared at where her daughter had just dragged the Boy-WhoLived out of the room with a patient look upon her young face.
“I’m terribly sorry,” said Professor Verres with an amused smile.
“But please don’t worry, Harry always talks like that. Aren’t they just
like a married couple already?”
The frightening thing was that they were.

**
*
Harry had been expecting a rather severe lecture from Hermione.
But after Hermione pulled them into the basement access and closed
the door behind them, she’d turned around—
—and was smiling, genuinely so far as Harry could tell.
“Please don’t, Harry,” she said in a soft voice. “Even though it’s very
nice of you. Everything’s ﬁne.”
Harry just looked at her. “How can you stand it?” he said. He had
to keep his voice quiet, they didn’t want the parents to hear, but it rose
in pitch if not in volume. “How can you stand it?”
Hermione shrugged, and said, “Because that’s the way parents should
be?”
*

643 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-SIX

*
*

*

“No,” Harry said, his voice low and intense, “it’s not, my father never
puts me down—well, he does, but never like that—”
Hermione held up a single ﬁnger, and Harry waited, watching her
search for words. It took her a while before she said, “Harry... Professor McGonagall and Professor Flitwick like me because I’m the most
talented witch of my generation and the brightest star of Hogwarts. And
Mum and Dad don’t know that, and you’ll never be able to tell them,
but they love me anyway. Which means that everything is just the way
it should be, at Hogwarts and at home. And since they’re my parents,
Mr. Potter, you don’t get to argue.” She was once again smiling her mysterious smile from dinnertime, and looking at Harry very fondly. “Is
that clear, Mr. Potter?”
Harry nodded tightly.
“Good,” said Hermione, and leaned over and kissed him on the
cheek.

**
*
The conversation had only just gotten started again when a distant highpitched yelp ﬂoated back to them,
“Hey! No kissing!”
The two fathers burst out in laughter just as the two mothers rose up
from their chairs with identical looks of horror and dashed toward the
basement.
When the children had been brought back, Hermione was saying in
an icy tone that she was never going to kiss Harry ever again, and Harry
was saying in an outraged voice that the Sun would burn down to a cold
dead cinder before he let her get close enough to try.
Which meant that everything was just the way it should be, and they
all sat back down again to ﬁnish their Christmas dinner.

*

644 *

CHAPTER

THIRT Y-SE V EN

INTERLUDE:
CROSSING THE BOUNDARY
t was almost midnight.
Staying up late was simple enough for Harry. He just hadn’t
used the Time-Turner. Harry followed a tradition of timing his sleep
cycle to make sure he was awake for when Christmas Eve turned into
Christmas Day; because while he’d never been young enough to believe
in Santa Claus, he’d once been young enough to doubt.
It would have been nice if there had been a mysterious ﬁgure who
entered your house in the night and brought you presents...
A chill went down Harry’s spine then.
An intimation of something dreadful approaching.
A creeping terror.
A sense of doom.
Harry sat bolt upright in bed.
He looked at the window.
“Professor Quirrell?” Harry shrieked very quietly.
Professor Quirrell made a slight lifting gesture, and Harry’s window
seemed to fold into its frame. At once a cold gust of winter blew into
the room through the gap, along with a scant few ﬂakes of snow from a
sky spotted with grey night-clouds, amid the black and stars.
“Fear not, Mr. Potter,” said the Defense Professor in a normal voice.
“I have Charmed your parents asleep; they shall not wake until I have
departed.”

I

*

645 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

“No one’s supposed to know where I am!” said Harry, still keeping
the shriek quiet. “Even owls are supposed to deliver my mail to Hogwarts, not here!” Harry had agreed to that willingly; it would be silly if
a Death Eater could win the whole war at any time just by owling him
a magically triggered hand grenade.
Professor Quirrell was grinning, from where he stood in the backyard beyond the window. “Oh, I shouldn’t worry, Mr. Potter. You are
well protected against locating Charms, and no blood purist is likely
to think of consulting a phone book.” His grin grew wider. “And
it did take considerable eﬀort to cross the wards that the Headmaster put around this house—though of course anyone who knew your
address could simply wait outside and attack you the next time you
left.”
Harry stared at Professor Quirrell for a while. “What are you doing
here?” Harry said ﬁnally.
The smile left Professor Quirrell’s face. “I’ve come to apologize,
Mr. Potter,” the Defense Professor said quietly. “I should not have spoken to you so harshly as I—”
“Don’t,” Harry said. He looked down at the blanket that he was
clutching around his pajamas. “Just don’t.”
“Have I oﬀended you that much?” said Professor Quirrell’s quiet
voice.
“No,” Harry said. “But you will if you apologize.”
“I see,” said Professor Quirrell, and in an instant his voice grew
stern. “Then if I am to treat you as an equal, Mr. Potter, I should say
that you have gravely violated the etiquette that holds between friendly
Slytherins. If you are not currently playing the game against someone, you must not meddle in their plans like that, not without asking
them before. For you do not know what their true design may be, nor
what stakes they may lose. It would mark you as their enemy, Mr. Potter.”
“I’m sorry,” Harry said, in just the same quiet tone that Professor
Quirrell had used.
“Apology accepted,” said Professor Quirrell.
“But,” Harry said, still quietly, “you and I really must speak further
*

646 *

**
*

INTERLUDE: CROSSING THE BOUNDARY

*
*

*

on politics, at some point.”
Professor Quirrell sighed. “I know you dislike condescension, Mister
Potter—”
That was a bit of an understatement.
“But it would be even more condescending,” said Professor Quirrell,
“if I were not to state it clearly. You are missing some life experience,
Mr. Potter.”
“And does everyone who has suﬃcient life experience agree with you,
then?” said Harry calmly.
“What good is life experience to someone who plays Quidditch?” said
Professor Quirrell, and shrugged. “I think you will change your mind
in time, after every trust you place has failed you, and you have become
cynical.”
The Defense Professor said it as though it were the most ordinary
statement in the world, framed against the black and the stars and the
cloud-spotted sky, as one or two tiny snowﬂakes blew past him in the
biting winter air.
“That reminds me,” said Harry. “Merry Christmas.”
“I suppose,” said Professor Quirrell. “After all, if it is not an apology,
then it must be a Christmas gift. The very ﬁrst one I have ever given, in
fact.”
Harry hadn’t even started yet on learning Latin so he could read the
experimental diary of Roger Bacon; and he hardly dared open his mouth
to ask.
“Put on your winter coat,” said Professor Quirrell, “or take a warming potion if you have one; and meet me outside, under the stars. I shall
see if I can maintain it a little longer this time.”
It took Harry a moment to process the words, and then he was dashing for the coat closet.
Professor Quirrell kept the spell of starlight going for more than an
hour, though the Defense Professor’s face grew strained, and he had to
sit down after a while. Harry protested only once, and was shushed.
They crossed the boundary from Christmas Eve to Christmas Day
within that timeless void where Earthly rotations meant nothing, the
one true everlasting Silent Night.
*

647 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

And just as promised, Harry’s parents slept soundly all through it,
until Harry was safely back in his room, and the Defense Professor had
gone.

*

648 *

CHAPTER

THIRT Y-EIGHT

THE CARDINAL SIN
right the sun, bright the air, bright the students and bright their
parents, clean the paved ground of Platform 9.75, the winter Sun
hanging low in the sky at 9:45am in the morning on January 5th, 1992.
Some of the younger students wore scarves and mittens, but most simply
wore their robes; they were wizards, after all.
After Harry had moved away from the landing platform, he took oﬀ
his scarf and coat, opened a compartment of his trunk, and stowed away
his winter things.
For a long moment, he stood there letting the January air bite at him,
just to see what it was like.
Harry took out his wizards’ robes, shrugged them on.
And ﬁnally, Harry drew his wand; and he couldn’t help thinking of
the parents he’d only just kissed goodbye, of the world whose problems
he was leaving behind...
With a strange feeling of guilt for the unavoidable, Harry said, “Thermos.”
The warmth ﬂowed through him.
And the Boy-Who-Lived was back.
Harry yawned and stretched, feeling more lethargic than anything
else at the conclusion of his vacation. He didn’t feel like reading his
textbooks, or even any serious science ﬁction, this morning; what he
needed was something completely frivolous to occupy his attention...
Well, that wouldn’t be hard to come by, if he was willing to part with
four Knuts.

B

*

649 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Besides, if the Daily Prophet was corrupt and the Quibbler was the
only competing newspaper, there might be some suppressed real news
in there.
Harry trudged back over to the same newsstand from last time, wondering if the Quibbler could top the headline he’d seen before.
The vendor started to smile as Harry approached, and then the man’s
face suddenly changed, as he caught sight of the scar.
“Harry Potter?” gasped the vendor.
“No, Mr. Durian,” said Harry, eyes dipping brieﬂy to the man’s
nametag, “just an amazing imitation—”
And then Harry’s voice stopped in his throat, as he caught sight of
the top fold of the Quibbler.

Sloshed Seer spills secrets:
Dark Lord to return,

For just an instant, Harry tried to clamp down on his face, before
realizing that not being shocked could be just as revealing, in a sense—
“Excuse me,” Harry said. His voice sounded a little alarmed, and he
didn’t even know whether that was too revealing, or just what his normal
reaction would be if he didn’t know anything. He’d spent too much time
around Slytherins, he was forgetting how to keep secrets from ordinary
people. Four Knuts hit the counter. “One copy of the Quibbler, please.”
“Oh, no worries, Mr. Potter!” said the vendor hastily, waving his
hands. “It’s—never mind, just—”
A newspaper ﬂew through the air and hit Harry’s ﬁngers, and he
unfolded it.

Sloshed Seer spills secrets:
Dark Lord to return,
Wed Draco Malfoy
*

650 *

**
*

THE CARDINAL SIN

*
*

*

“It’s free,” said the vendor, “for you, I mean—”
“No,” Harry said, “I was going to buy one anyway.”
The vendor took the coins, and Harry read on.
“Gosh,” Harry said half a minute later, “you get a seer smashed on
six slugs of Scotch and she spills all sorts of secret stuﬀ. I mean, who’d
have thought that Sirius Black and Peter Pettigrew were secretly the same
person?”
“Not me,” said the vendor.
“They’ve even got a picture of the two of them together, so we know
who it is that’s secretly the same person.”
“Yup,” said the vendor. “Pretty clever disguise, innit?”
“And I’m secretly sixty-ﬁve years old.”
“You don’t look half that,” the vendor said amiably.
“And I’m betrothed to Hermione Granger, and Bellatrix Black, and
Luna Lovegood, and oh yes, Draco Malfoy too...”
“Goin’ ter be one interesting wedding,” said the vendor.
Harry looked up from the newspaper, and said in a pleasant voice,
“You know, I heard at ﬁrst that Luna Lovegood was insane, and I wondered if she really was, or if she was just making stuﬀ up and giggling to
herself the whole time. Then when I read my second Quibbler headline,
I decided that she couldn’t be insane, I mean, it can’t be easy to make this
stuﬀ up, you couldn’t do it by accident. And now do you know what I
think? I think she must be mad after all. When ordinary people try to
make stuﬀ up, it doesn’t come out like this. Something’s got to go really
wrong with the inside of your head before this is what comes out when
you start making stuﬀ up!”
The vendor stared at Harry.
“Seriously,” said Harry. “Who reads this stuﬀ?”
“You,” said the vendor.
Harry wandered oﬀ to read his newspaper.
He didn’t sit at the same nearby table he’d sat down at with Draco,
the ﬁrst time he’d prepared to board this train. That seemed like tempting history to repeat itself.
It wasn’t just that his ﬁrst week at Hogwarts had been, judging by the
Quibbler, ﬁfty-four years long. It was that, in Harry’s humble opinion,
*

651

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

his life did not need any new threads of complexity.
So Harry found a small iron chair somewhere else, distant from the
main crowd and the occasional muﬄed cracks of parents Apparating
in with their children, and sat down and read the Quibbler to see if it
contained any suppressed news.
And besides the obvious craziness (heaven help them all if any of that
was real) there was a good deal of snide romantic gossip; but nothing that
would really be all that important if it was true.
Harry was just reading about the Ministry’s proposed marriage law,
to ban all marriages, when—
“Harry Potter,” said a silken voice that sent a shock of adrenaline
jolting through Harry’s blood.
Harry looked up.
“Lucius Malfoy,” Harry said, his voice weary. Next time he was going to do the smart thing, and wait outside in the Muggle part of King’s
Cross until 10:55am.
Lucius inclined his head courteously, sending his long white hair
drifting over his shoulders. The man was still carrying that same cane,
lacquered in black with a silver snake’s head for its handle; and something about his grip silently said this is a weapon of deadly power, not I
am feeble and leaning on this. His face was expressionless.
Two men ﬂanked him, their eyes continuously scanning, their wands
already gripped low in their hands. The two of them moved like a single
organism with four legs and four arms, the senior Crabbe-and-Goyle,
and Harry thought he could guess which was which, but then it didn’t
really matter. They were merely Lucius’s appendages, as certainly as if
they’d been the two rightmost toes on his left foot.
“I apologize for disturbing you, Mr. Potter,” said the smooth, silken
voice. “But you have answered none of my owls; and this, I thought,
might be my only opportunity to meet you.”
“I have received none of your owls,” Harry said calmly. “Dumbledore intercepted them, I presume. But I would not have answered them
if I had, except through Draco. For me to deal with you directly, without Draco’s knowledge, would trespass on our friendship.”
Please go away, please go away...
*

652 *

**
*

THE CARDINAL SIN

*
*

*

The grey eyes glittered at him. “Is that your pose, then...” said the
senior Malfoy. “Well. I shall play along a little. What was your purpose
in maneuvering your good friend, my son, into a public alliance with
that girl?”
“Oh,” Harry said lightly, “that’s obvious, right? Draco’s working
with Granger will make him realize that Muggleborns are human after
all. Bwa. Ha. Ha.”
A thin trace of a smile moved over Lucius’s lips. “Yes, that does
sound like one of Dumbledore’s plans. Which it is not.”
“Indeed,” said Harry. “It is part of my game with Draco, and no
work of Dumbledore’s, and that is all I will say.”
“Let us dispense with games,” said the senior Malfoy, the grey eyes
suddenly hardening. “If my suspicions are true, you would hardly do
Dumbledore’s bidding in any case, Mr. Potter.”
There was a slight pause.
“So you know,” Harry said, his voice cold. “Tell me. At which point,
exactly, did you realize?”
“When I read your response to Professor Quirrell’s little speech,” said
the white-haired man, and chuckled grimly. “I was puzzled, at ﬁrst, for
it seemed not in your own interest; it took me days to understand whose
interest was being served, and then it all ﬁnally became clear. And it is
also obvious that you are weak, in some ways if not others.”
“Very clever of you,” said Harry, still cold. “But perhaps you mistake
my interests.”
“Perhaps I do.” A hint of steel came into the silken voice. “Indeed,
that is precisely what I fear. You are playing strange games with my son,
to a purpose I cannot guess. That is not a friendly act, and you cannot
but expect me to be concerned!”
Lucius was leaning upon his cane with both hands now, and both
those hands white, and his bodyguards had suddenly tensed.
Some instinct within Harry claimed that it would be a very bad idea
to show his fear, to let Lucius see that he could be intimidated. They
were in a public train station anyway—
“I ﬁnd it interesting,” Harry said, putting steel into his own voice,
“that you think I could beneﬁt from doing Draco harm. But it is irrele*

653 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

vant, Lucius. He is my friend, and I do not betray my friends.”
“What?” whispered Lucius. His face showed sheer shock.
Then—
“Company,” said one of the minions, and Harry thought, from the
voice, that it must be the senior Crabbe.
Lucius straightened and turned, then let out a hiss of disapproval.
Neville was approaching, looking scared but determined, in tow behind a tall woman who didn’t look scared at all.
“Madam Longbottom,” Lucius said icily.
“Mr. Malfoy,” returned the woman with equal ice. “Are you being
an annoyance to our Harry Potter?”
The bark of laughter that came from Lucius seemed strangely bitter.
“Oh, I rather think not. Come to protect him from me, have you?” The
white-haired head shifted toward Neville. “And this would be Mr. Potter’s loyal lieutenant, the last scion of Longbottom, Neville, self-styled
of Chaos. How strangely does the world turn. Sometimes I think it
must all be mad.”
Harry had no idea at all what to say to that, and Neville looked
confused, and frightened.
“I doubt it is the world that is mad,” said Madam Longbottom. Her
voice took on a gloating tone. “You seem in a poor mood, Mr. Malfoy.
Did the speech of our dear Professor Quirrell cost you a few allies?”
“It was a clever enough slander of my abilities,” Lucius said coldly,
“though only eﬀective upon the fools who believe that I was truly a
Death Eater.”
“What?” blurted Neville.
“I was under the Imperius, young man,” said Lucius, now sounding
tired. “The Dark Lord could hardly have begun recruiting among pureblood families without the support of House Malfoy. I demurred, and
he simply made sure of me. His own Death Eaters did not know it until afterward, hence the false Mark I bear; though since I did not truly
consent, it does not bind me. Some of the Death Eaters still believe I
was foremost among their number, and for the peace of this nation I let
them believe it, to keep them controlled. But I was not such a fool as to
support that ill-fated adventurer of my own choice—”
*

654 *

**
*

THE CARDINAL SIN

*
*

*

“Ignore him,” Madam Longbottom said, the instruction addressed
to Harry as well as Neville. “He must spend the rest of his life pretending, for fear of your testimony under Veritaseum.” Said with malicious
satisfaction.
Lucius turned his back on her dismissively, and faced Harry again.
“Will you request this harridan to depart, Mr. Potter?”
“I think not,” said Harry in a dry voice. “I prefer to deal with the
part of House Malfoy that’s my own age.”
There was a long pause, then. The grey eyes searched him.
“Of course...” said Lucius slowly. “I do feel the fool now. This whole
time you were just pretending to have no idea what we were talking
about.”
Harry met the gaze, and said nothing.
Lucius raised his cane a few centimeters and struck it hard on the
ground.
The world vanished in a pale haze, all sounds went quiet, there was
nothing in the universe but Harry and Lucius Malfoy and the snakeheaded cane.
“My son is my heart,” said the senior Malfoy, “the last worthwhile
thing I have left in this world, and this I say to you in a spirit of friendship: if he were to come to harm, I would give my life over to vengeance.
But so long as my son does not come to harm, I wish you the best of luck
in your endeavors. And as you have asked nothing more of me, I will
ask nothing more of you.”
Then the pale haze vanished, showing an outraged Madam Longbottom being blocked from moving forward by the senior Crabbe; her wand
was in her hand, now.
“How dare you!” she hissed.
Lucius’s dark robes swirled around him, and his white hair, as he
turned to the senior Goyle. “We return to Malfoy Manor.”
There were three pops of Apparition, and they were gone.
A silence followed.
“Dear heavens,” said Madam Longbottom. “What was that about?”
Harry shrugged helplessly. Then he looked at Neville.
There was sweat on Neville’s forehead.
*

655 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

“Thank you very much, Neville,” said Harry. “Your help was greatly
appreciated, Neville. And now, Neville, I think you should sit down.”
“Yes, General,” said Neville, and instead of coming over to one of
the other chairs near Harry, he semi-collapsed into a sitting position on
the pavement.
“You have wrought many changes in my grandson,” said Madam
Longbottom. “I approve of some, but not others.”
“Send me the list of which is which,” said Harry. “I’ll see what I can
do.”
Neville groaned, but said nothing.
Madam Longbottom gave a chuckle. “I shall, young man, thank
you.” Her voice lowered. “Mr. Potter... the speech given by Professor
Quirrell is something our nation has long needed to hear. I cannot say
as much of your comment on it.”
“I will take your opinion under advisement,” Harry said mildly.
“I dearly hope that you do,” said Madam Longbottom, and turned
back to her grandson. “Do I still need to—”
“It’s okay for you to go, Granma,” said Neville. “I’ll be ﬁne on my
own, this time.”
“Now that I approve of,” she said, and popped and vanished like a
soap bubble.
The two boys sat quietly for a moment.
Neville spoke ﬁrst, his voice weary. “You’re going to try to ﬁx all
the changes she approves of, right?”
“Not all of them,” Harry said innocently. “I just want to make sure
I’m not corrupting you.”

**
*
Draco looked very worried. His head kept darting around, despite the
fact that Draco had insisted on them going down into Harry’s trunk, and
using a true Quieting Charm and not just the sound-blurring barrier.
“What did you say to Father?” blurted Draco, the moment the Quieting Charm went up and the sounds of Platform 93/4 vanished.
*

656 *

**
*

THE CARDINAL SIN

*
*

*

“I... look, can you tell me what he said to you, before he dropped you
oﬀ?” said Harry.
“That I should tell him right away if you seemed to be threatening
me,” said Draco. “That I should tell him right away if there was anything I was doing that could pose a threat to you! Father thinks you’re
dangerous, Harry, whatever you said to him today it scared him! It’s not
a good idea to scare Father!”
Oh, hell...
“What did you talk about?” demanded Draco.
Harry leaned back wearily in the small folding chair that sat at the
bottom of his trunk’s cavern. “You know, Draco, just as the fundamental question of rationality is ‘What do I think I know and how do I think
I know it?’, there’s also a cardinal sin, a way of thinking that’s the opposite of that. Like the ancient Greek philosophers. They had no clue
what was going on, so they’d go around saying things like ‘All is water’
or ‘All is ﬁre’, and they never asked themselves, ‘Wait a minute, even
if everything is water, how could I possibly know that?’ They didn’t
ask themselves if they had evidence which discriminated that possibility from all the other possibilities you could imagine, evidence they’d be
very unlikely to encounter if the theory wasn’t true—”
“Harry,” Draco said, his voice strained, “What did you talk about with
Father?”
“I don’t know, actually,” said Harry, “so it’s very important that I
not just make stuﬀ up—”
Harry had never heard Draco shriek in horror in quite that high a
pitch before.

*

657 *

CHAPTER

THIRT Y-NINE

PRETENDING TO BE WISE,
PART I
histle. Tick. Bzzzt. Ding. Glorp. Pop. Splat. Chime. Toot.
Puﬀ. Tinkle. Bubble. Beep. Thud. Crackle. Whoosh. Hiss.
Pﬀft. Whirr.
Professor Flitwick had silently passed Harry a folded parchment during Charms class that Monday, and the note had said that Harry was to
visit the Headmaster at his convenience and in such fashion that no one
else would notice, especially not Draco Malfoy or Professor Quirrell.
His one-time password for the gargoyle would be “squeamish ossifrage”.
This had been accompanied by a remarkably artistic ink drawing of Professor Flitwick staring at him sternly, the eyes of which occasionally
blinked; and at the bottom of the note, underlined three times, was the
phrase Don’t get into trouble.
And so Harry had ﬁnished up Transﬁguration class, and studied with
Hermione, and eaten dinner, and spoken with his lieutenants, and ﬁnally, when the clock struck nine, turned himself invisible and dropped
back to 6pm and wearily trudged oﬀ toward the gargoyle, the turning
spiral stairs, the wooden door, the room full of little ﬁddly things, and
the silver-bearded ﬁgure of the Headmaster.
This time, Dumbledore looked quite serious, the customary smile
absent; and he was dressed in pajamas of a darker and more sober purple
than usual.
“Thank you for coming, Harry,” said the Headmaster. The old wizard rose from his throne, began to slowly pace through the room and

W

*

659 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

the strange devices. “First, do you have with you the notes of yesterday’s encounter with Lucius Malfoy?”
“Notes?” blurted Harry.
“Surely you wrote it down...” said the old wizard, and his voice trailed
oﬀ.
Harry felt rather embarrassed. Yes, if you’d just fumbled through a
mysterious conversation full of signiﬁcant hints you didn’t understand,
the bloody obvious thing to do would be to write it all down immediately
afterward, before the memory faded, so you could try to ﬁgure it out
later.
“All right,” said the Headmaster, “from memory then.”
Harry sheepishly recited as best he could, and got almost halfway
through before he realized that it wasn’t smart to just go around telling
the possibly-crazy Headmaster everything, at least not without thinking
about it ﬁrst, but then Lucius was deﬁnitely a bad guy and Dumbledore’s
opponent so it probably was a good idea to tell him, and Harry had
already started talking and it was too late to try and calculate things out
now...
Harry ﬁnished his recollections honestly.
Dumbledore’s face had grown more remote as Harry went on, and
at the end there was a look of ancientness about him, a sternness in the
air.
“Well,” said Dumbledore. “I suggest you take the best of care that
the heir of Malfoy does not come to harm, then. And I will do the
same.” The Headmaster was frowning, his ﬁngers drumming soundlessly
through the inky black surface of a plate inscribed with the word Leliel.
“And I think it would be most extremely wise for you to avoid all interaction with Lord Malfoy henceforth.”
“Did you intercept owls from him to me?” said Harry.
The Headmaster gazed at Harry for a long moment, then reluctantly
nodded.
For some reason Harry wasn’t feeling as outraged as he should have
been. Maybe it was just that Harry was ﬁnding it very easy to sympathize with the Headmaster’s point of view right now. Even Harry
could understand why Dumbledore wouldn’t want him to interact with
*

660 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

Lucius Malfoy; it didn’t seem like an evil deed.
Not like the Headmaster blackmailing Zabini... for which they had
only Zabini’s word, and Zabini was wildly untrustworthy, in fact it was
hard to see why Zabini wouldn’t just tell the story that got him the most
sympathy from Professor Quirrell...
“How about if, instead of protesting, I say that I understand your
point of view,” said Harry, “and you go on intercepting my owls, but
you tell me who from?”
“I have intercepted a great many owls to you, I am afraid,” Dumbledore said soberly. “You are a celebrity, Harry, and you would receive
dozens of letters a day, some from far outside this country, did I not
turn them back.”
“That,” Harry said, now starting to feel a bit of indignation, “seems
like going a little too far—”
“Many of those letters,” the old wizard said quietly, “will be asking
you for things you cannot give. I have not read them, of course, only
turned them back to their senders undelivered. But I know, for I receive
them too. And you are too young, Harry, to have your heart broken six
times before breakfast each morning.”
Harry looked down at his shoes. He should insist on reading the
letters and judging for himself, but... there was a small voice of common
sense inside him, and it was screaming very loudly right now.
“Thank you,” Harry muttered.
“The other reason I asked you here,” said the old wizard, “was that I
wished to consult your unique genius.”
“Transﬁguration?” said Harry, surprised and ﬂattered.
“No, not that unique genius,” said Dumbledore. “Tell me, Harry,
what evil could you accomplish if a Dementor were allowed onto the
grounds of Hogwarts?”

**
*
It developed that Professor Quirrell had asked, or rather demanded, that
his students test their skills against an actual Dementor after they learned
the words and gestures to the Patronus Charm.
*

661

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

“Professor Quirrell is unable to cast the Patronus Charm himself,”
said Dumbledore, as he paced slowly through the devices. “Which is
never a good sign. But then, he volunteered that fact to me in the course
of demanding that outside instructors be brought in to teach the Patronus Charm to every student who wished to learn; he oﬀered to pay
the expense himself, if I would not. This impressed me greatly. But now
he insists on bringing in a Dementor—”
“Headmaster,” Harry said quietly, “Professor Quirrell believes very
strongly in live-ﬁre tests under realistic combat conditions. Wanting to
bring in an actual Dementor is completely in character for him.”
Now the Headmaster was giving Harry a strange look.
“In character?” said the old wizard.
“I mean,” said Harry, “it’s entirely consistent with the way Professor
Quirrell usually acts...” Harry trailed oﬀ. Why had he put it that way?
The Headmaster nodded. “So you have the same sense I do; that it is
an excuse. A very reasonable excuse, to be sure; more so than you may
realize. Often, wizards seemingly unable to cast a Patronus Charm will
succeed in the presence of an actual Dementor, going from not a single
ﬂicker of light to a full corporeal Patronus. Why this should be, no one
knows; but it is so.”
Harry frowned. “Then I really don’t see why you’re suspicious—”
The Headmaster spread his hands as though in helplessness. “Harry,
the Defense Professor has asked me to pass the darkest of all creatures
through the gates of Hogwarts. I must be suspicious.” The Headmaster
sighed. “And yet the Dementor will be guarded, warded, in a mighty
cage, I will be there myself to watch it at all times—I cannot think of
what ill could be done. But perhaps I am merely unable to see it. And
so I am asking you.”
Harry stared at the Headmaster with his mouth open. He was so
shocked he couldn’t even feel ﬂattered.
“Me?” said Harry.
“Yes,” said Dumbledore, smiling slightly. “I try my best to anticipate my foes, to encompass their wicked minds and predict their evil
thoughts. But I would never have imagined sharpening a Huﬄepuﬀ’s
bones into weapons.”
*

662 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

Was Harry ever going to live that down?
“Headmaster,” Harry said wearily, “I know it doesn’t sound good,
but in all seriousness: I’m not evil, I’m just very creative—”
“I did not say that you were evil,” Dumbledore said seriously. “There
are those who say that to comprehend evil is to become evil; but they
are merely pretending to be wise. Rather it is evil which does not know
love, and dares not imagine love, and cannot ever understand love without ceasing to be evil. And I suspect that you can imagine your way into
the minds of Dark Wizards better than I ever could, while still knowing
love yourself. So, Harry.” The Headmaster’s eyes were intent. “If you
stood in Professor Quirrell’s shoes, what misdeeds could you accomplish after you tricked me into allowing a Dementor onto the grounds
of Hogwarts?”
“Hold on,” said Harry, and in something of a daze trudged over to
the chair in front of the Headmaster’s desk, and sat down. It was a large
and comfortable chair this time, not a wooden stool, and Harry could
feel himself enveloped as he sank into it.
Dumbledore was asking him to outwit Professor Quirrell.
Point one: Harry was rather fonder of Professor Quirrell than of
Dumbledore.
Point two: The hypothesis was that the Defense Professor was planning to do something evil, and in that subjunctive case, Harry ought to
be helping the Headmaster prevent it.
Point three...
“Headmaster,” Harry said, “if Professor Quirrell is up to something,
I’m not sure I can outwit him. He’s got a lot more experience than I
do.”
The old wizard shook his head, somehow managing to appear very
solemn despite his smile. “You underestimate yourself.”
That was the ﬁrst time anyone had ever said that to Harry.
“I remember,” the old wizard continued, “a young man in this
very oﬃce, cold and controlled as he faced down the Head of House
Slytherin, blackmailing his own Headmaster to protect his classmates.
And I believe that young man is more cunning than Professor Quirrell,
more cunning than Lucius Malfoy, that he will grow to be the equal of
*

663 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

Voldemort himself. It is he who I wish to consult.”
Harry suppressed the chill that went through him at the name,
frowned thoughtfully at the Headmaster.
How much does he know...?
The Headmaster had seen Harry in the grip of his mysterious dark
side, as deep as Harry had ever sunk into it. Harry still remembered
what it had been like to watch, invisibly Time-Turned, as his past self
faced down the older Slytherins; the boy with the scar on his forehead
who didn’t act like the others. Of course the Headmaster would have
noticed something odd about the boy in his oﬃce...
And Dumbledore had concluded that his pet hero had cunning to
match his destined foe, the Dark Lord.
Which wasn’t asking for very much, considering that the Dark Lord
had put a clearly visible Dark Mark on all of his servants’ left arms, and
that he’d slaughtered the entire monastery that taught the martial art
he’d wanted to learn.
Enough cunning to match Professor Quirrell would be a whole diﬀerent order of problem.
But it was also clear that the Headmaster wouldn’t be satisﬁed until
Harry went all cold and darkish, and came up with some sort of answer
that sounded impressively cunning... which had better not actually get
in the way of Professor Quirrell’s teaching Defense...
And of course Harry would go over to his dark side and think it
through from that direction, just to be honest, and just in case.
“Tell me,” Harry said, “everything about how the Dementor is to be
brought in, and how it is to be guarded.”
Dumbledore’s eyebrows rose for a moment, and then the old wizard
began to speak.
The Dementor would be transported to the grounds of Hogwarts
by an Auror trio, all three personally known to the Headmaster, and all
three able to cast a corporeal Patronus Charm. They would be met at
the edge of the grounds by Dumbledore, who would pass the Dementor
through the Hogwarts wards—
Harry asked if the pass was permanent or temporary—whether
someone could just bring in the same Dementor again the next day.
*

664 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

The pass was temporary (replied the Headmaster with an approving
nod), and the explanation went on: The Dementor would be in a cage
of solid titanium bars, not Transﬁgured but true-forged; in time a Dementor’s presence would corrode that metal to dust, but not in a single
day.
Students awaiting their turn would stay well back of the Dementor,
behind two corporeal Patronuses maintained by two of the three Aurors at any given time. Dumbledore would wait by the Dementor’s cage
with his Patronus. A single student would approach the Dementor; and
Dumbledore would dispel his Patronus; and the student would attempt
to cast their own Patronus Charm; and if they failed, Dumbledore would
restore his Patronus before the student could suﬀer any permanent damage. Past dueling champion Professor Flitwick would also be present
while there were students near, just to add safety margin.
“Why just you waiting by the Dementor?” said Harry. “I mean,
shouldn’t it be you plus an Auror—”
The Headmaster shook his head. “They could not withstand the
repeated exposure to the Dementor, each time I dispel my Patronus.”
And if Dumbledore’s Patronus did fail for some reason, while one
of the students was still near the Dementor, the third Auror would cast
another corporeal Patronus and send it to shield the student...
Harry poked and prodded, but he couldn’t see a ﬂaw in the security.
So Harry took a deep breath, sank further into the chair, closed his
eyes, and remembered:
“And that will be... ﬁve points? No, let us make it an even ten points
from Ravenclaw for backchat.”
The cold came more slowly now, more reluctantly, Harry hadn’t
been calling much on his dark side lately...
Harry had to run through that entire session in Potions in his mind,
before his blood chilled into something approaching deadly crystalline
clarity.
And then he thought of the Dementor.
And it was obvious.
“The Dementor is a distraction,” Harry said. The coldness clear in
his voice, since that was what Dumbledore wanted and expected. “A
*

665 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

large, salient threat, but in the end straightforward, and easy to defend
against. So while all your attention is focused on the Dementor, the real
plot will be happening elsewhere.”
Dumbledore stared at Harry for a moment, and then gave a slow
nod. “Yes...” said the Headmaster. “And I do believe I know what it
might be a distraction from, if Professor Quirrell means ill... thank you,
Harry.”
The Headmaster was still staring at Harry, a strange look in those
ancient eyes.
“What?” said Harry with a tinge of annoyance, the cold still lingering
in his blood.
“I have another question for that young man,” said the Headmaster.
“It is something I have long wondered to myself, yet been unable to
comprehend. Why?” There was a tinge of pain in his voice. “Why would
anyone deliberately make himself a monster? Why do evil for the sake
of evil? Why Voldemort?”

**
*
Whirr, bzzzt, tick; ding, puﬀ, splat...
Harry stared at the Headmaster in surprise.
“How would I know?” said Harry. “Am I supposed to magically
understand the Dark Lord because I’m the hero, or something?”
“Yes!” said Dumbledore. “My own great foe was Grindelwald, and
him I understood very well indeed. Grindelwald was my dark mirror,
the man I could so easily have been, had I given in to the temptation to
believe that I was a good person, and therefore always in the right. For the
greater good, that was his slogan; and he truly believed it himself, even as
he tore at all Europe like a wounded animal. And him, I defeated in the
end. But then after him came Voldemort, to destroy everything I had
protected in Britain.” The hurt was plain now in Dumbledore’s voice,
exposed upon his face. “He committed acts worse by far than Grindelwald’s worst, horror for the sake of horror. I sacriﬁced everything only
to hold him back, and I still don’t understand why! Why, Harry? Why
*

666 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

did he do it? He was never my destined foe, but yours, so if you have
any guesses at all, Harry, please tell me! Why?”
Harry stared down at his hands. The truth was that Harry hadn’t
read up on the Dark Lord yet, and right now he hadn’t the tiniest clue.
And somehow that didn’t seem like an answer the Headmaster wanted
to hear. “Too many Dark rituals, maybe? In the beginning he thought
he’d do just one, but it sacriﬁced part of his good side, and that made him
less reluctant to perform other Dark rituals, so he did more and more
rituals in a positive feedback cycle until he ended up as a tremendously
powerful monster—”
“No!” Now the Headmaster’s voice was agonized. “I can’t believe
that, Harry! There has to be something more to it than just that!”
Why should there be? thought Harry, but he didn’t say it, because
it was clear that the Headmaster thought the universe was a story and
had a plot, and that huge tragedies weren’t allowed to happen except for
equally huge, signiﬁcant reasons. “I’m sorry, Headmaster. The Dark
Lord doesn’t seem like much of a dark mirror to me, not at all. There
isn’t anything I ﬁnd even the tiniest bit tempting about nailing the skins
of Yermy Wibble’s family to a newsroom wall.”
“Have you no wisdom to share?” said Dumbledore. There was pleading in the old wizard’s voice, almost begging.
Evil happens, thought Harry, it doesn’t mean anything or teach us anything, except to not be evil? The Dark Lord was probably just a selﬁsh bastard
who didn’t care who he hurt, or an idiot who made stupidly avoidable mistakes that snowballed. There is no destiny behind the ills of this world; if
Hitler had been allowed into architecture school like he wanted, the whole
history of Europe would have been diﬀerent; if we lived in the sort of universe where horrible things were only allowed to happen for good reasons,
they just wouldn’t happen in the ﬁrst place.
And none of that, obviously, was what the Headmaster wanted to
hear.
The old wizard was still looking at Harry from over a ﬁddly thing
like a frozen puﬀ of smoke, a painful desperation in those ancient, waiting eyes.
Well, sounding wise wasn’t diﬃcult. It was a lot easier than being
*

667 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

intelligent, actually, since you didn’t have to say anything surprising
or come up with any new insights. You just let your brain’s patternmatching software complete the cliche, using whatever Deep Wisdom
you’d stored previously.
“Headmaster,” Harry said solemnly, “I would rather not deﬁne myself by my enemies.”
Somehow, even in the midst of all the whirring and ticking, there
was a kind of silence.
That had come out a bit more Deeply Wise than Harry had intended.
“You may be very wise, Harry...” the Headmaster said slowly. “I do
wish... that I could have been deﬁned by my friends.” The pain in his
voice had grown deeper.
Harry’s mind searched hastily for something else Deeply Wise to say
that would soften the unintended force of the blow—
“Or perhaps,” Harry said more softly, “it is the foe that makes the
Gryﬃndor, as it is the friend that makes the Huﬄepuﬀ, and the ambition
that makes the Slytherin. I do know that it is always, in every generation,
the puzzle that makes the scientist.”
“It is a dreadful fate to which you condemn my House, Harry,” said
the Headmaster. The pain was still in his voice. “For now that you
remark on it, I do think that I was very much made by my enemies.”
Harry stared at his own hands, where they lay in his lap. Maybe he
should just shut up while he was ahead.
“But you have answered my question,” said Dumbledore more softly,
as though to himself. “I should have realized that would be a Slytherin’s
key. For his ambition, all for the sake of his ambition; and that I know,
though not why...” For a time Dumbledore stared oﬀ into nothingness;
then he straightened, and his eyes seemed to focus on Harry again.
“And you, Harry,” said the Headmaster, “you name yourself a scientist?” His voice was laced with surprise and mild disapproval.
“You don’t like science?” said Harry a little wearily. He’d hoped
Dumbledore would be fonder of Muggle things.
“I suppose it is useful to those without wands,” said Dumbledore,
frowning. “But it seems a strange thing by which to deﬁne yourself. Is
science as important as love? As kindness? As friendship? Is it science
*

668 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

that makes you fond of Minerva McGonagall? Is it science that makes
you care for Hermione Granger? Will it be science to which you turn,
when you try to kindle warmth in Draco Malfoy’s heart?”
You know, the sad thing is, you probably think you just uttered some
kind of incredibly wise knockdown argument.
Now, how to phrase the rejoinder in such fashion that it also sounded
incredibly wise...
“You are not Ravenclaw,” Harry said with calm dignity, “and so it
might not have occurred to you that to respect the truth, and seek it all
the days of your life, could also be an act of grace.”
The Headmaster’s eyebrows rose up. And then he sighed. “How did
you become so wise, so young...?” The old wizard sounded sad, as he
said it. “Perhaps it will prove valuable to you.”
Only for impressing ancient wizards who are overly impressed with
themselves, thought Harry. He was actually a bit disappointed by Dumbledore’s credulity; it wasn’t that Harry had lied, but Dumbledore
seemed far too impressed with Harry’s ability to phrase things so that
they sounded profound, instead of putting them into plain English like
Richard Feynman had done with his wisdom...
“Love is more important than wisdom,” said Harry, just to test the
limits of Dumbledore’s tolerance for blindingly obvious cliches completed by sheer pattern matching without any sort of detailed analysis.
The Headmaster nodded gravely, and said, “Indeed.”
Harry stood up out of the chair, and stretched his arms. Well, I’d
better go oﬀ and love something, then, that’s bound to help me defeat the
Dark Lord. And next time you ask me for advice, I’ll just give you a hug—
“This day you have helped me much, Harry,” said the Headmaster.
“And so there is one last thing I would ask that young man.”
Great.
“Tell me, Harry,” said the Headmaster (and now his voice sounded
simply puzzled, though there was still a hint of pain in his eyes), “why
do Dark Wizards fear death so greatly?”
“Er,” said Harry, “sorry, I’ve got to back the Dark Wizards on that
one.”

**
*
*

669 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

Whoosh, hiss, chime; glorp, pop, bubble—
“What?” said Dumbledore.
“Death is bad,” said Harry, discarding wisdom for the sake of clear
communication. “Very bad. Extremely bad. Being scared of death is
like being scared of a great big monster with poisonous fangs. It actually
makes a great deal of sense, and does not, in fact, indicate that you have
a psychological problem.”
The Headmaster was staring at him as though he’d just turned into
a cat.
“Okay,” said Harry, “let me put it this way. Do you want to die?
Because if so, there’s this Muggle thing called a suicide prevention hotline—”
“When it is time,” the old wizard said quietly. “Not before. I would
never seek to hasten the day, nor seek to refuse it when it comes.”
Harry was frowning sternly. “That doesn’t sound like you have a
very strong will to live, Headmaster!”
“Harry...” The old wizard’s voice was starting to sound a little helpless; and he had paced to a spot where his silver beard, unnoticed, had
drifted into a crystalline glass goldﬁsh bowl, and was slowly taking on
a greenish tinge that crept up the hairs. “I think I may have not made
myself clear. Dark Wizards are not eager to live. They fear death. They
do not reach up toward the sun’s light, but ﬂee the coming of night into
inﬁnitely darker caverns of their own making, without moon or stars.
It is not life they desire, but immortality; and they are so driven to grasp
at it that they will sacriﬁce their very souls! Do you want to live forever,
Harry?”
“Yes, and so do you,” said Harry. “I want to live one more day.
Tomorrow I will still want to live one more day. Therefore I want to
live forever, proof by induction on the positive integers. If you don’t
want to die, it means you want to live forever. If you don’t want to live
forever, it means you want to die. You’ve got to do one or the other...
I’m not getting through here, am I.”
The two cultures stared at each other across a vast gap of incommen-

*

670 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

surability.
“I have lived a hundred and ten years,” the old wizard said quietly
(taking his beard out of the bowl, and jiggling it to shake out the color).
“I have seen and done a great many things, too many of which I wish I
had never seen or done. And yet I do not regret being alive, for watching
my students grow is a joy that has not begun to wear on me. But I would
not wish to live so long that it does! What would you do with eternity,
Harry?”
Harry took a deep breath. “Meet all the interesting people in the
world, read all the good books and then write something even better,
celebrate my ﬁrst grandchild’s tenth birthday party on the Moon, celebrate my ﬁrst great-great-great grandchild’s hundredth birthday party
around the Rings of Saturn, learn the deepest and ﬁnal rules of Nature,
understand the nature of consciousness, ﬁnd out why anything exists in
the ﬁrst place, visit other stars, discover aliens, create aliens, rendezvous
with everyone for a party on the other side of the Milky Way once we’ve
explored the whole thing, meet up with everyone else who was born on
Old Earth to watch the Sun ﬁnally go out, and I used to worry about
ﬁnding a way to escape this universe before it ran out of negentropy but
I’m a lot more hopeful now that I’ve discovered the so-called laws of
physics are just optional guidelines.”
“I did not understand much of that,” said Dumbledore. “But I must
ask if these are things that you truly desire so desperately, or if you only
imagine them so as to imagine not being tired, as you run and run from
death.”
“Life is not a ﬁnite list of things that you check oﬀ before you’re
allowed to die,” Harry said ﬁrmly. “It’s life, you just go on living it. If
I’m not doing those things it’ll be because I’ve found something better.”
Dumbledore sighed. His ﬁngers drummed on a clock; as they
touched it, the numerals changed to an indecipherable script, and the
hands brieﬂy appeared in diﬀerent positions. “In the unlikely event that
I am permitted to tarry until a hundred and ﬁfty,” said the old wizard,
“I do not think I would mind. But two hundred years would be entirely
too much of a good thing.”
“Yes, well,” Harry said, his voice a little dry as he thought of his Mum
*

671

*

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

and Dad and their allotted span if Harry didn’t do something about it,
“I suspect, Headmaster, that if you came from a culture where people
were accustomed to living four hundred years, that dying at two hundred
would seem just as tragically premature as dying at, say, eighty.” Harry’s
voice went hard, on that last word.
“Perhaps,” the old wizard said peacefully. “I would not wish to die
before my friends, nor live on after they had all gone. The hardest time is
when those you loved the most have gone on before you, and yet others
still live, for whose sake you must stay...” Dumbledore’s eyes were ﬁxed
on Hary, and growing sad. “Do not mourn me too greatly, Harry, when
my time comes; I will be with those I have long missed, on our next great
adventure.”
“Oh!” Harry said in sudden realization. “You believe in an afterlife.
I got the impression wizards didn’t have religion?”

**
*
Toot. Beep. Thud.
“How can you not believe it?” said the Headmaster, looking completely ﬂabbergasted. “Harry, you’re a wizard! You’ve seen ghosts!”
“Ghosts,” Harry said, his voice ﬂat. “You mean those things like
portraits, stored memories and behaviors with no awareness or life, accidentally impressed into the surrounding material by the burst of magic
that accompanies the violent death of a wizard—”
“I’ve heard that theory,” said the Headmaster, his voice growing
sharp, “repeated by wizards who mistake cynicism for wisdom, who
think that to look down upon others is to elevate themselves. It is one
of the silliest ideas I have heard in a hundred and ten years! Yes, ghosts do
not learn or grow, because this is not where they belong! Souls are meant
to move on, there is no life remaining for them here! And if not ghosts,
then what of the Veil? What of the Resurrection Stone?”
“All right,” Harry said, trying to keep his voice calm, “I’ll hear out
your evidence, because that’s what a scientist does. But ﬁrst, Headmaster,
let me tell you a little story.” Harry’s voice was trembling. “You know,
*

672 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

when I got here, when I got oﬀ the train from King’s Cross, I don’t mean
yesterday but back in September, when I got oﬀ the train then, Headmaster, I’d never seen a ghost. I wasn’t expecting ghosts. So when I saw
them, Headmaster, I did something really dumb. I jumped to conclusions.
I, I thought there was an afterlife, I thought no one had ever really died,
I thought that everyone the human species had ever lost was really ﬁne
after all, I thought that wizards could talk to people who’d passed on,
that it just took the right spell to summon them, that wizards could do
that, I thought I could meet my parents who died for me, and tell them
that I’d heard about their sacriﬁce and that I’d begun to call them my
mother and father—”
“Harry,” whispered Dumbledore. Water glittered in the old wizard’s
eyes. He took a step closer across the oﬃce—
“And then,” spat Harry, the fury coming fully into his voice, the cold
rage at the universe for being like that and at himself for being so stupid,
“I asked Hermione and she said that they were just afterimages, burned
into the stone of the castle by the death of a wizard, like the silhouettes
left on the walls of Hiroshima. And I should have known! I should have
known without even having to ask! I shouldn’t have believed it even for
all of thirty seconds! Because if people had souls there wouldn’t be any
such thing as brain damage, if your soul could go on speaking after your
whole brain was gone, how could damage to the left cerebral hemisphere
take away your ability to talk? And Professor McGonagall, when she
told me about how my parents had died, she didn’t act like they’d just
gone away on a long trip to another country, like they’d emigrated to
Australia back in the days of sailing ships, which is the way people would
act if they actually knew that death was just going somewhere else, if they
had hard evidence for an afterlife, instead of making stuﬀ up to console
themselves, it would change everything, it wouldn’t matter that everyone
had lost someone in the war, it would be a little sad but not horrible! And
I’d already seen that people in the wizarding world didn’t act like that! So
I should have known better! And that was when I knew that my parents
were really dead and gone forever and ever, that there wasn’t anything
left of them, that I’d never get a chance to meet them and, and, and the
other children thought I was crying because I was scared of ghosts—”
*

673 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

The old wizard’s face was horriﬁed, he opened his mouth to speak—
“So tell me, Headmaster! Tell me about the evidence! But don’t you
dare exaggerate a single tiny bit of it, because if you give me false hope
again, and I ﬁnd out later that you lied or stretched things just a little, I
won’t ever forgive you for it! What’s the Veil?”
Harry reached up and wiped at his cheeks, while the glass things of
the oﬃce stopped vibrating from his last shriek.
“The Veil,” said the old wizard with only a slight tremble in his voice,
“is a great stone archway, kept in the Department of Mysteries; a gateway
to the land of the dead.”
“And how does anyone know that?” said Harry. “Don’t tell me what
you believe, tell me what you’ve seen!”
The physical manifestation of the barrier between worlds was a great
stone archway, old and tall and coming to a sharp point, with a tattered
black veil like the surface of a pool of water, stretched between the stones;
rippling, always, from the constant and one-way passage of the souls.
If you stood by the Veil you could hear the voices of the dead calling,
always calling in whispers barely on the wrong side of comprehension,
growing louder and more numerous if you stayed and tried to hear, as
they tried to communicate; and if you listened too long, you would go
to meet them, and in the moment you touched the Veil you would be
sucked through, and never be heard from again.
“That doesn’t even sound like an interesting fraud,” Harry said, his
voice calmer now that there was nothing there to make him hope, or
make him angry for having hopes dashed. “Someone built a stone archway, made a little black rippling surface between it that Vanished anything it touched, and enchanted it to whisper to people and hypnotize
them.”
“Harry...” the Headmaster said, starting to look rather worried. “I
can tell you the truth, but if you refuse to hear it...”
Also not interesting. “What’s the Resurrection Stone?”
“I would not tell you,” the Headmaster said slowly, “save that I fear
what this disbelief may do to you... so listen, then, Harry, please listen...”
The Resurrection Stone was one of the three legendary Deathly Hallows, kin to Harry’s cloak. The Resurrection Stone could call souls back
*

674

*

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

from the dead—bring them back into the world of the living, though not
as they were. Cadmus Peverell used the stone to call back his lost beloved
from the dead, but her heart stayed with the dead, and not in the world
of the living. And in time it drove him mad, and he killed himself to be
truly with her once more...
In all politeness, Harry raised his hand.
“Yes?” the Headmaster said reluctantly.
“The obvious test to see if the Resurrection Stone is really calling
back the dead, or just projecting an image from the user’s mind, is to ask
a question whose answer you don’t know, but the dead person would, and
that can be deﬁnitely veriﬁed in this world. For example, call back—”
Then Harry paused, because this time he’d managed to think it
through one step ahead of his tongue, fast enough to not say the ﬁrst
name and test that had sprung to mind.
“...your dead wife, and ask her where she left her lost earring, or
something like that,” Harry ﬁnished. “Did anyone do any tests like
that?”
“The Resurrection Stone has been lost for centuries, Harry,” the
Headmaster said quietly.
Harry shrugged. “Well, I’m a scientist, and I’m always willing to
be convinced. If you really believe the Resurrection Stone calls back
the dead—then you must believe a test like that will succeed, right? So
do you know anything about where to ﬁnd the Resurrection Stone? I
got one Deathly Hallow already under highly mysterious circumstances,
and, well, we both know how the rhythm of the world works on that
sort of thing.”
Dumbledore stared at Harry.
Harry gazed equably back at the Headmaster.
The old wizard passed a hand across his forehead and muttered, “This
is madness.”
(Somehow, Harry managed to stop himself from laughing.)
And Dumbledore told Harry to draw forth the Cloak of Invisibility from his pouch; at the Headmaster’s direction, Harry stared at the
inside and back of the hood until he saw it, faintly drawn against the
silvery mesh in faded scarlet like dried blood, the symbol of the Deathly
*

675 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

Hallows: a triangle, with a circle drawn inside, and a line dividing them
both.
“Thank you,” Harry said politely. “I shall be sure to keep an eye out
for a stone so marked. Do you have any other evidence?”
Dumbledore appeared to be ﬁghting a struggle within himself.
“Harry,” the old wizard said, his voice rising, “this is a dangerous road
you are walking, I am not sure I do the right thing by saying this, but
I must wrench you from this way! Harry, how could Voldemort have
survived the death of his body if he did not have a soul?”
And that was when Harry realized that there was exactly one person
who’d originally told Professor McGonagall that the Dark Lord was still
alive in the ﬁrst place; and it was the crazy Headmaster of their madhouse
of a school, who thought the world ran on cliches.
“Good question,” Harry said, after some internal debate about how
to proceed. “Maybe he found some way of duplicating the power of the
Resurrection Stone, only he loaded it in advance with a complete copy of
his brain state. Or something like that.” Harry was suddenly far from
sure that he was trying to come up with an explanation for something
that had actually happened. “Actually, can you just go ahead and tell
me everything you know about how the Dark Lord survived and what
it might take to kill him?” If he even still exists as more than Quibbler
headlines.
“You are not fooling me, Harry,” said the old wizard; his face looked
ancient now, and lined by more than years. “I know why you are truly
asking that question. No, I do not read your mind, I do not have to,
your hesitation gives you away! You seek the secret of the Dark Lord’s
immortality in order to use it for yourself!”
“Wrong! I want the secret of the Dark Lord’s immortality in order
to use it for everyone!”

**
*
Tick, crackle, fzzzt...
Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore just stood there and stared
at Harry with his mouth gaping open dumbly.
*

676 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

(Harry awarded himself a tally mark for Monday, since he’d managed
to blow someone’s mind completely before the day was over.)
“And in case it wasn’t clear,” said Harry, “by everyone I mean all
Muggles too, not just all wizards.”
“No,” said the old wizard, shaking his head. His voice rose. “No,
no, no! This is insanity!”
“Bwa ha ha!” said Harry.
The old wizard’s face was tight with anger and worry. “Voldemort
stole the book from which he gleaned his secret; it was not there when
I went to look for it. But this much I know, and this much I will tell
you: his immortality was born of a ritual terrible and Dark, blacker
than pitchest black! And it was Myrtle, poor sweet Myrtle, who died
for it; his immortality took sacriﬁce, it took murder—”
“Well obviously I’m not going to popularize a method of immortality
that requires killing people! That would defeat the entire point!”
There was a startled pause.
Slowly the old wizard’s face relaxed out of its anger, though the
worry was still there. “You would use no ritual requiring human sacriﬁce.”
“I don’t know what you take me for, Headmaster,” Harry said coldly,
his own anger rising, “but let’s not forget that I’m the one who wants
people to live! The one who wants to save everyone! You’re the one who
thinks death is awesome and everyone ought to die!”
“I am at a loss, Harry,” said the old wizard. His feet once more began
trudging across his strange oﬃce. “I know not what to say.” He picked
up a crystal ball that seemed to hold a hand in ﬂames, looked into it
with a sad expression. “Only that I am greatly misunderstood by you...
I don’t want everyone to die, Harry!”
“You just don’t want anyone to be immortal,” Harry said with
considerable irony. It seemed that elementary logical tautologies like
All x : Die(x) = N ot Exist x : N ot Die(x) were beyond the reasoning
abilities of the world’s most powerful wizard.
The old wizard nodded. “I am less afraid than I was, but still greatly
worried for you, Harry,” he said quietly. His hand, a little wizened by
time, but still strong, placed the crystal ball ﬁrmly back into its stand.
*

677 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

“For the fear of death is a bitter thing, an illness of the soul by which
people are twisted and warped. Voldemort is not the only Dark Wizard
to go down that bleak road, though I fear he has taken it further than
any before him.”
“And you think you’re not afraid of death?” Harry said, not even
trying to mask the incredulity in his voice.
The old wizard’s face was peaceful. “I am not perfect, Harry, but I
think I have accepted my death as part of myself.”
“Uh huh,” Harry said. “See, there’s this little thing called cognitive
dissonance, or in plainer English, sour grapes. If people were hit on the
heads with truncheons once a month, and no one could do anything
about it, pretty soon there’d be all sorts of philosophers, pretending to
be wise as you put it, who found all sorts of amazing beneﬁts to being hit
on the head with a truncheon once a month. Like, it makes you tougher,
or it makes you happier on the days when you’re not getting hit with a
truncheon. But if you went up to someone who wasn’t getting hit, and
you asked them if they wanted to start, in exchange for those amazing
beneﬁts, they’d say no. And if you didn’t have to die, if you came from
somewhere that no one had ever even heard of death, and I suggested
to you that it would be an amazing wonderful great idea for people to
get wrinkled and old and eventually cease to exist, why, you’d have me
hauled right oﬀ to a lunatic asylum! So why would anyone possibly
think any thought so silly as that death is a good thing? Because you’re
afraid of it, because you don’t really want to die, and that thought hurts
so much inside you that you have to rationalize it away, do something
to numb the pain, so you won’t have to think about it—”
“No, Harry,” the old wizard said. His face was gentle, his hand
trailed through a lighted pool of water that made small musical chimes
as his ﬁngers stirred it. “Though I can understand how you must think
so.”
“Do you want to understand the Dark Wizard?” Harry said, his voice
now hard and grim. “Then look within the part of yourself that ﬂees not
from death but from the fear of death, that ﬁnds that fear so unbearable
that it will embrace Death as a friend and cozen up to it, try to become
one with the night so that it can think itself master of the abyss. You
*

678 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

have taken the most terrible of all evils and called it good! With only a
slight twist that same part of yourself would murder innocents, and call
it friendship. If you can call death better than life then you can twist
your moral compass to point anywhere—”
“I think,” said Dumbledore, shaking water droplets from his hand
to the sound of tiny tinkling bells, “that you understand Dark Wizards
very well, without yet being one yourself.” It was said in perfect seriousness, and without accusation. “But your comprehension of me, I fear, is
sorely lacking.” The old wizard was smiling now, and there was a gentle
laughter in his voice.
Harry was trying not to go any colder than he already was; from
somewhere there was pouring into his mind a blazing fury of resentment, at Dumbledore’s condescension, and all the laughter that wise old
fools had ever used in place of argument. “Funny thing, you know, I
thought Draco Malfoy was going to be this impossible to talk to, and
instead, in his childish innocence, he was a hundred times stronger than
you.”
A look of puzzlement crossed the old wizard’s face. “What do you
mean?”
“I mean,” Harry said, his voice biting, “that Draco actually took his
own beliefs seriously and processed my words instead of throwing them out
the window by smiling with gentle superiority. You’re so old and wise,
you can’t even notice anything I’m saying! Not understand, notice!”
“I have listened to you, Harry,” said Dumbledore—a smile crossed
his face before being quickly wiped away—“but to listen is not always to
agree. Disagreements aside, what is it that you think I do not comprehend?”
That if you really believed in an afterlife, you’d go down to St. Mungo’s
and kill Neville’s parents, Alice and Frank Longbottom, so they could go on
to their next great adventure, instead of letting them linger here in their
damaged state—
Harry barely, barely kept himself from saying it out loud.
“All right,” Harry said coldly. “I’ll answer your original question,
then. You asked why Dark Wizards are afraid of death. Pretend, Headmaster, that you really believed in souls. Pretend that anyone could ver*

679 *

**
*

CHAPTER THIRT Y-NINE

*
*

*

ify the existence of souls at any time, pretend that nobody cried at funerals because they knew their loved ones were still alive. Now can you
imagine destroying a soul? Ripping it to shreds so that nothing remains
to go on its next great adventure? Can you imagine what a terrible thing
that would be, the worst crime that had ever been committed in the
history of the universe, which you would do anything to prevent from
happening even once? Because that’s what Death really is—the annihilation of a soul!”
The old wizard was staring at him, a sad look in his eyes. “I suppose
I do understand now,” he said quietly.
“Oh?” said Harry. “Understand what?”
“Voldemort,” said the old wizard. “I understand him now at last.
Because to believe that the world is truly like that, you must believe
there is no justice in it, that it is woven of darkness at its core. I asked
you why he became a monster, and you could give no reason. And if I
could ask him, I suppose, his answer would be: Why not?”

**
*
They stood there gazing into each other’s eyes, the old wizard in his
robes, and the young boy with the lightning-bolt scar on his forehead.
“Tell me, Harry,” said the old wizard, “will you become a monster?”
“No,” said the boy, an iron certainty in his voice.
“Why not?” said the old wizard.
The young boy stood very straight, his chin raised high and proud,
and said: “There is no justice in the laws of Nature, Headmaster, no term
for fairness in the equations of motion. The universe is neither evil, nor
good, it simply does not care. The stars don’t care, or the Sun, or the
sky. But they don’t have to! We care! There is light in the world, and it
is us!”
“I wonder what will become of you, Harry,” said the old wizard. His
voice was soft, with a strange wonder and regret in it. “It is enough to
make me wish to live just to see it.”
*

680 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE I

*
*

*

The boy bowed to him with heavy irony, and departed; and the
oaken door slammed shut behind him with a thud.

*

681

*

CHAPTER

FORT Y

PRETENDING TO BE WISE,
PART II
arry, holding the tea cup in the exactly correct way that Professor Quirrell had needed to demonstrate three times, took a small,
careful sip. All the way across the long, wide table that was the centerpiece of Mary’s Room, Professor Quirrell took a sip from his own cup,
making it look far more natural and elegant. The tea itself was something whose name Harry couldn’t even pronounce, or at least, every
time Harry had tried to repeat the Chinese words, Professor Quirrell
had corrected him, until ﬁnally Harry had given up.
Harry had maneuvered himself into getting a glimpse at the bill last
time, and Professor Quirrell had let him get away with it.
He’d felt an impulse to drink a Comed-Tea ﬁrst.
Even taking that into account, Harry had still been shocked out of his
skin.
And it still tasted to him like, well, tea.
There was a quiet, nagging suspicion in Harry’s mind that Professor
Quirrell knew this, and was deliberately buying ridiculously expensive
tea that Harry couldn’t appreciate just to mess with him. Professor Quirrell himself might not like it all that much. Maybe nobody actually liked
this tea, and the only point of it was to be ridiculously expensive and
make the victim feel unappreciative. In fact, maybe it was really just ordinary tea, only you asked for it in a certain code, and they put a fake
gigantic price on the bill...
Professor Quirrell’s expression was drawn and thoughtful. “No,”
Professor Quirrell said, “you should not have told the Headmaster about

H

*

683 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y

*
*

*

your conversation with Lord Malfoy. Please try to think faster next time,
Mr. Potter.”
“I’m sorry, Professor Quirrell,” Harry said meekly. “I still don’t
see it.” There were times when Harry felt very much like an impostor,
pretending to be cunning in Professor Quirrell’s presence.
“Lord Malfoy is Albus Dumbledore’s opponent,” said Professor
Quirrell. “At least for this present time. All Britain is their chessboard, all wizards their pieces. Consider: Lord Malfoy threatened to
throw away everything, abandon his game, to take vengeance on you if
Mr. Malfoy was hurt. In which case, Mr. Potter...?”
It took more long seconds for Harry to get it, but it was clear that
Professor Quirrell wasn’t going to give any more hints, not that Harry
wanted them.
Then Harry’s mind ﬁnally made the connection, and he frowned.
“Dumbledore kills Draco, makes it look like I did it, and Lucius sacriﬁces
his game against Dumbledore to get at me? That... doesn’t seem like the
Headmaster’s style, Professor Quirrell...” Harry’s mind ﬂashed back to a
similar warning from Draco, which had made Harry say the same thing.
Professor Quirrell shrugged, and sipped his tea.
Harry sipped his own tea, and sat in silence. The tablecloth spread
over the table was in a very peaceful pattern, seeming at ﬁrst like plain
cloth, but if you stared at it long enough, or kept silent long enough, you
started to see a faint tracery of ﬂowers glimmering on it; the curtains of
the room had changed their pattern to match, and seemed to shimmer
as though in a silent breeze. Professor Quirrell was in a contemplative
mood that Saturday, and so was Harry, and Mary’s Room, it seemed,
had not neglected to notice this.
“Professor Quirrell,” Harry said suddenly, “is there an afterlife?”
Harry had chosen the question carefully. Not, do you believe in an
afterlife? but simply Is there an afterlife? What people really believed
didn’t seem to them like beliefs at all. People didn’t say, ‘I strongly believe
in the sky being blue!’ They just said, ‘the sky is blue’. Your true inner
map of the world just felt to you like the way the world was...
The Defense Professor raised his cup to his lips again before answering. His face was thoughtful. “If there is, Mr. Potter,” said Professor
*

684 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE II

*
*

*

Quirrell, “then quite a few wizards have wasted a great deal of eﬀort in
their searches for immortality.”
“That’s not actually an answer,” Harry observed. He’d learned by
now to notice that sort of thing when talking to Professor Quirrell.
Professor Quirrell set down his teacup with a small, high-pitched
tacking sound on his saucer. “Some of those wizards were reasonably
intelligent, Mr. Potter, so you may take it that the existence of an afterlife is not obvious. I have looked into the matter myself. There have
been many claims of the sort which hope and fear would be expected to
produce. Among those reports whose veracity is not in doubt, there is
nothing which could not be the result of mere wizardry. There are certain devices said to communicate with the dead, but these, I suspect, only
project an image from the mind; the result seems indistinguishable from
memory because it is memory. The alleged spirits tell no secrets they
knew in life, nor could have learned after death, which are not known
to the wielder—”
“Which is why the Resurrection Stone is not the most valuable magical artifact in the world,” said Harry.
“Precisely,” said Professor Quirrell, “though I wouldn’t say no to a
chance to try it.” There was a dry, thin smile on his lips; and something
colder, more distant, in his eyes. “You spoke to Dumbledore of that as
well, I take it.”
Harry nodded.
The curtains were taking on a faintly blue pattern, and a dim tracery
of elaborate snowﬂakes now seemed to be becoming visible on the tablecloth. Professor Quirrell’s voice sounded very calm. “The Headmaster
can be very persuasive, Mr. Potter. I hope he has not persuaded you.”
“Heck no,” said Harry. “Didn’t fool me for a second.”
“I should hope not,” said Professor Quirrell, still in that very calm
tone. “I would be extremely put out to discover that the Headmaster
had convinced you to throw away your life on some fool plot by telling
you that death is the next great adventure.”
“I don’t think the Headmaster believed it himself, actually,” Harry
said. He sipped his own tea again. “He asked me what I could possibly
do with eternity, gave me the usual line about it being boring, and he
*

685 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y

*
*

*

didn’t seem to see any conﬂict between that and his own claim to have
an immortal soul. In fact, he gave me a whole long lecture about how
awful it was to want immortality before he claimed to have an immortal
soul. I can’t quite visualize what must have been going on inside his head,
but I don’t think he actually had a mental model of himself continuing
forever in the afterlife...”
The temperature of the room seemed to be dropping.
“You perceive,” said a voice like ice from the other end of the table,
“that Dumbledore does not truly believe as he speaks. It is not that he
has compromised his principles. It is that he never had them from the
beginning. Are you becoming cynical yet, Mr. Potter?”
Harry had dropped his eyes to his teacup. “A little,” Harry said to his
possibly-ultra-high-quality, perhaps-ridiculously-expensive Chinese tea.
“I’m certainly becoming a bit frustrated with... whatever’s going wrong
in people’s heads.”
“Yes,” said that icy voice. “I ﬁnd it frustrating as well.”
“Is there any way to get people not to do that?” said Harry to his
teacup.
“There is indeed a certain useful spell which solves the problem.”
Harry looked up hopefully at that, and saw a cold, cold smile on the
Defense Professor’s face.
Then Harry got it. “I mean, besides Avada Kedavra.”
The Defense Professor laughed. Harry didn’t.
“Anyway,” Harry said hastily, “I did think fast enough not to suggest
the obvious idea about the Resurrection Stone in front of Dumbledore.
Have you ever seen a stone with a line, inside a circle, inside a triangle?”
The deathly chill seemed to draw back, fold into itself, as the ordinary Professor Quirrell returned. “Not that I can recall,” Professor
Quirrell said after a while, a thoughtful frown on his face. “That is the
Resurrection Stone?”
Harry set aside his teacup, then drew on his saucer the symbol he
had seen on the inside of his cloak. And before Harry could take out
his own wand to cast the Hover Charm, the saucer went ﬂoating obligingly across the table toward Professor Quirrell. Harry really wanted to
learn that wandless stuﬀ, but that, apparently, was far above his current
*

686 *

**
*

PRETENDING TO BE WISE II

*
*

*

curriculum.
Professor Quirrell studied Harry’s tea-saucer for a moment, then
shook his head; and a moment later, the saucer went ﬂoating back to
Harry.
Harry put his teacup back on the saucer, noting absently as he did so
that the symbol he’d drawn had vanished. “If you happen to see a stone
with that symbol,” said Harry, “and it does talk to the afterlife, do let me
know. I have a few questions for Merlin or anyone who was around in
Atlantis.”
“Quite,” said Professor Quirrell. Then the Defense Professor lifted
up his teacup again, and tipped it back as though to ﬁnish the last of
what was there. “By the way, Mr. Potter, I fear we shall have to cut short
today’s visit to Diagon Alley. I was hoping it would—but never mind.
Let it stand that there is something else I must do this afternoon.”
Harry nodded, and ﬁnished his own tea, then rose from his seat at
the same time as Professor Quirrell.
“One last question,” Harry said, as Professor Quirrell’s coat lifted
itself oﬀ the coatrack and went ﬂoating toward the Defense Professor.
“Magic is loose in the world, and I no longer trust my guesses so much as
I once did. So in your own best guess and without any wishful thinking,
do you believe there’s an afterlife?”
“If I did, Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell as he shrugged on his
coat, “would I still be here?”

*

687 *

CHAPTER

FORT Y-ONE

INTERLUDE:
FRONTAL OV ERRIDE
he biting January wind howled around the vast, blank stone walls
that demarcated the material bounds of the castle Hogwarts, whispering and whistling in odd pitches as it blew past closed windows and
stone minarets. The most recent snow had mostly blown away, but occasional patches of melted and refrozen ice still stuck to the stone face
and blazed reﬂected sunlight. From a distance, it must have looked like
Hogwarts was blinking hundreds of eyes.
A sudden gust made Draco ﬂinch, and try, impossibly, to press his
body even closer to the stone, which felt like ice and smelled like ice.
Some utterly pointleiss instinct seemed convinced that he was about to
be blown oﬀ the outer wall of Hogwarts, and that the best way to prevent
this was to jerk around in helpless reﬂex and possibly throw up.
Draco was trying very hard not to think about the six stories worth
of empty air underneath him, and focus, instead, on how he was going
to kill Harry Potter.
“You know, Mr. Malfoy,” said the young girl beside him in a conversational voice, “if a seer had told me that someday I’d be hanging onto
the side of a castle by my ﬁngertips, trying not to look down or think
about what Mum’d say if she saw me, I wouldn’t’ve had any idea of how
it’d happen, except that it’d be Harry Potter’s fault.”

T

*

689 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-ONE

*
*

*

Earlier:
The two allied Generals stepped together over Longbottom’s body,
their boots hitting the ﬂoor in almost perfect synchrony.
Only a single soldier now stood between them and Harry, a Slytherin
boy named Samuel Clamons, whose hand was clenched white around his
wand, held upward to sustain his Prismatic Wall. The boy’s breathing
was coming rapidly, but his face showed the same cold determination
that lit the eyes of his general, Harry Potter, who was standing behind
the Prismatic Wall at the dead end of the corridor next to an open window, with his hands held mysteriously behind his back.
The battle had been ridiculously diﬃcult, for the enemy being outnumbered two-to-one. It should have been easy, the Dragon Army
and Sunshine Regiment had melded together easily in practice sessions,
they’d fought each other long enough to know each other very well
indeed. Morale was high, both armies knowing that this time they
weren’t just ﬁghting to win for themselves, but ﬁghting for a world free
of traitors. Despite the surprised protests of both generals, the soldiers
of the combined army had insisted on calling themselves Dramione’s
Sungon Argiment, and produced patches for their insignia of a smiling
face wreathed in ﬂames.
But Harry’s soldiers had all blackened their own insignia—it didn’t
look like paint, more like they’d burned that part of their uniforms—and
they’d fought all through the upper levels of Hogwarts with a desperate
fury. The cold rage that Draco sometimes saw in Harry had seemed to
trickle down into his soldiers, and they’d fought like it hadn’t been play.
And Harry had emptied out his entire bag of tricks, there’d been tiny
metal balls (Granger had identiﬁed them as “ball bearings”) on ﬂoors
and staircases, rendering them impassable until cleared, only Harry’s
army had already practiced coordinated Hover Charms and they could
ﬂy their own people right over the obstacles they’d made...
You couldn’t bring devices into the game from outside, but you could
Transﬁgure anything you wanted during the game, so long as it was safe.
And that just wasn’t fair when you were ﬁghting a boy raised by scientists, who knew about things like ball bearings and skateboards and
* 690 *

**
*

INTERLUDE: FRONTAL OV ERRIDE

*
*

*

bungee cords.
And so it had come to this.
The survivors of the allied forces had cornered the last remnants of
Harry Potter’s army in a dead-end corridor.
Weasley and Vincent had rushed Longbottom at the same time, moving together like they’d practiced for weeks instead of hours, and somehow Longbottom had managed to hex them both before falling himself.
And now it was Draco and Granger and Padma and Samuel and
Harry, and by the looks of Samuel, his Prismatic Wall couldn’t last much
longer.
Draco had already leveled his wand at Harry, waiting for the Prismatic Wall to fall of its own accord; there was no need to waste a Breaking
Drill Hex before then. Padma leveled her own wand at Samuel, Granger
leveled hers at Harry...
Harry was still hiding his hands behind his back, instead of aiming
his wand; and looking at them with a face that could have been carved
out of ice.
It might be a bluﬀ. It probably wasn’t.
There was a brief, tense silence.
And then Harry spoke.
“I’m the villain now,” the young boy said coldly, “and if you think
villains are this easy to ﬁnish oﬀ, you’d better think again. Beat me when
I’m ﬁghting seriously, and I’ll stay beaten; but lose, and we’ll be doing
this all over again next time.”
The boy brought his hands forward, and Draco saw that Harry was
wearing strange gloves, with a peculiar grayish material on the ﬁngertips,
and buckles that stapped the gloves tightly to his wrists.
Beside Draco, the Sunshine General gasped in horror; and Draco,
without even asking why, ﬁred a Breaking Drill Hex.
Samuel staggered, he let out a scream as he staggered, but he held the
Wall; and if Padma or Granger ﬁred now, they would exhaust their own
forces so badly that they might just lose.
“Harry!” shouted Granger. “You can’t be serious!”
Harry was already in motion.
And as he swung out the open window, his cold voice said, “Follow
*

691 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-ONE

*
*

*

if you dare.”

**
*
The icy wind howled around them.
Draco’s arms were already starting to feel tired.
...It had developed that, yesterday, Harry had carefully demonstrated
to Granger exactly how to Transﬁgure the gloves he was currently wearing, which used something called ‘gecko setae’; and how to glue Transﬁgured patches of the same material to the toes of their shoes; and Harry
and Granger had, in innocent childish play, tried climbing around the
walls and ceiling a little.
And that, also yesterday, Harry had supplied Granger with a grand
total of exactly two doses of Feather-Falling Potion to carry around in
her pouch, “just in case”.
Not that Padma would have followed them, anyway. She wasn’t
crazy.
Draco carefully peeled loose his right hand, stretched it over as far as
he could, and slapped it down on the stone again. Beside him, Granger
did the same.
They’d already swallowed the Feather-Falling Potion. It was skirting
the edges of the game rules, but the potion wouldn’t be activated unless
one of them actually fell, and so long as they didn’t fall they weren’t
using the item.
Professor Quirrell was watching them; and so, no doubt, was Dumbledore.
The two of them were perfectly, completely, utterly safe.
Harry Potter, on the other hand, was going to die.
“I wonder why Harry is doing this,” said General Granger in a reﬂective tone, as she slowly peeled the ﬁngertips of one hand oﬀ the wall with
an extended sticky sound. Her hand plopped back down again almost
as soon as it was lifted. “I’ll have to ask him that after I kill him.”
It was amazing how much the two of them were turning out to have
in common.
*

692 *

**
*

INTERLUDE: FRONTAL OV ERRIDE

*
*

*

Draco didn’t really feel like talking right now, but he managed to say,
through gritted teeth, “Could be revenge. For the date.”
“Really,” said Granger. “After all this time.”
Stick. Plop.
“How sweet of him,” said Granger.
Stick. Plop.
“I guess I’ll ﬁnd some truly romantic way to thank him,” said Granger.
Stick. Plop.
“What’s he got against you?” said Granger.
Stick. Plop.
The icy wind howled around them.

**
*
One might have thought it would feel safer to have ground under your
feet again.
But if that ground was a slanted roof tiled with rough slats, which had
rather a lot more ice on it than the stone walls, and you were running
across it at a high rate of speed...
Then you would be sadly mistaken.
“Luminos!” shouted Draco.
“Luminos!” shouted Granger.
“Luminos!” shouted Draco.
“Luminos!” shouted Granger.
The distant ﬁgure was dodging and scrambling as it ran, and not a
single shot hit, but they were gaining.
Until Granger slipped.
It was inevitable, in retrospect, in real life you couldn’t actually run
across icy slanted rooftops at a high rate of speed.
And also inevitably, because it happened without the slightest
thought, Draco spun and grabbed for Granger’s right arm, and he caught
her, only she was already too far oﬀ balance, she was falling and pulling
Draco with her, it all happened so quickly—
*

693 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-ONE

*
*

*

There was a hard, painful impact, not just Draco’s weight hitting the
rooftop but some of Granger’s weight too, and if she’d hit just a little bit
closer to the edge they could have made it, but instead her body tipped
again and her legs slipped oﬀ and her other hand grabbed frantically...
And that was how Draco ended up holding onto Granger’s arm in a
white grip, while her other hand clenched frantically at the edge of the
rooftop and the toes of Draco’s shoes dug into the edge of a roof tile.
“Hermione!” Harry’s voice shrieked distantly.
“Draco,” whispered Granger’s voice, and Draco looked down.
That might have been a mistake. There was a lot of air underneath
her, nothing but air, they were on the edge of a rooftop that had jutted
out from the main stone wall of Hogwarts.
“He’s going to come help me,” whispered the girl, “but ﬁrst he’s
going to Luminos both of us, there’s no way he wouldn’t. You have to
let me go.”
It should have been the easiest thing in the world.
She was just a mudblood, just a mudblood, just a mudblood!
She wouldn’t even be hurt!
...Draco’s brain wasn’t listening to anything Draco was telling it right
now.
“Do it,” Hermione Granger whispered, her eyes blazing without a
single trace of fear, “do it, Draco, do it, you can beat him yourself we
have to win Draco!”
There was a sound of someone running and it was coming closer.
Oh, be rational...
The voice in Draco’s head sounded an awful lot like Harry Potter
teaching lessons.
...are you going to let your brain run your life?
Aftermath, 1:
It was taking a bit of an eﬀort for Daphne Greengrass to keep herself quiet, as Millicent Bulstrode retold the story in the Slytherin girls’
common room (a cozy cool place in the dungeons running beneath the
Hogwarts Lake, with ﬁsh swimming past every window, and couches
*

694 *

**
*

INTERLUDE: FRONTAL OV ERRIDE

*
*

*

you could lie down in if you wanted). Mostly because, in Daphne’s
opinion, it was a perfectly good story already without all of Millicent’s
improvements.
“And then what?” gasped Flora and Hestia Carrow.
“General Granger looked up at him,” Millicent said dramatically,
“and she said, ‘Draco! You’ve got to let go of me! Don’t worry about
me, Draco, I promise I’ll be all right! And what do you suppose Malfoy
did then?”
“He said ‘Never!’,” shouted Charlotte Wiland, “and held on even
tighter!”
All the listening girls except Pansy Parkinson nodded.
“Nope!” said Millicent. “He dropped her. And then he jumped up
and shot General Potter. The end.”
There was a stunned pause.
“You can’t do that!” said Charlotte.
“She’s a mudblood,” said Pansy, sounding confused. “Of course he let
go!”
“Well, Malfoy shouldn’t have grabbed her in the ﬁrst place, then!”
said Charlotte. “But once he grabbed her, he had to hang on! Especially
in the face of approaching certain doom!” Tracey Davis, sitting next to
Daphne, was nodding along in ﬁrm agreement.
“I don’t see why,” said Pansy.
“That’s because you don’t have the tiniest smidgin of romance in
you,” said Tracey. “Besides, you can’t just go dropping girls. A boy
who’d drop a girl like that... he’d drop anyone. He’d drop you, Pansy.”
“What d’you mean, drop me?” Pansy said.
Daphne couldn’t resist any more. “You know,” Daphne said darkly,
“you’re eating breakfast one day at our table, and the next thing you
know, Malfoy lets go of you, and you’re falling oﬀ the top of Hogwarts!
That’s what!”
“Yeah!” said Charlotte. “He’s a witch dropper!”
“You know why Atlantis fell?” said Tracey. “’Cause someone like
Malfoy dropped it, that’s why!”
Daphne lowered her voice. “In fact... what if Malfoy’s the one who
made Hermione, I mean General Granger, slip in the ﬁrst place? What
*

695 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-ONE

*
*

*

if he’s out to make all the Muggleborns trip and fall?”
“You mean—?” gasped Tracey.
“That’s right!” Daphne said dramatically. “What if Malfoy is—the
heir of Slipperin?”
“The next Drop Lord!” said Tracey.
Which was far too good a line for anyone to keep to themselves, so
by nightfall it was all over Hogwarts, and the next morning it was the
Quibbler’s headline.
Aftermath, 2:
Hermione made sure she got to their usual classroom nice and early
that evening, just so that she would be by herself, in a chair, peacefully
reading a book, when Harry got there.
If there was any way for a door to creak open apologetically, that was
how the door was creaking open.
“Um,” said Harry Potter’s voice.
Hermione kept reading.
“I’m, um, kinda sorry, I didn’t mean for you to actually fall oﬀ the
roof or anything...”
It had been quite an entertaining experience, in fact.
“I, ah... I don’t have much experience apologizing, I’ll fall to my
knees if you want, or buy you something expensive, Hermione I don’t
know how to apologize to you for this what can I do just tell me?”
She kept reading the book in silence.
It wasn’t as if she had any idea how Harry could apologize, either.
Right now she was just feeling a sort of odd curiosity as to what
would happen if she kept reading her book for a while.

*

696 *

CHAPTER

FORT Y-TWO

COURAGE
omantic?” Hermione said. “They’re both boys!”
“Wow,” Daphne said, sounding a little shocked. “You mean
Muggles really do hate that? I thought that was just something the Death
Eaters made up.”
“No,” said an older Slytherin girl Hermione didn’t recognize, “it’s
true, they have to get married in secret, and if they’re ever discovered,
they get burned at the stake together. And if you’re a girl who thinks
it’s romantic, they burn you too.”
“That can’t be right!” objected a Gryﬃndor girl, while Hermione
was still trying to sort out what to say to that. “There wouldn’t be any
Muggle girls left!”
She’d kept on reading quietly, and Harry Potter had kept on trying
to apologize, and it had soon dawned on Hermione that Harry had realized, possibly for the ﬁrst time in his life, that he’d done something
annoying; and that Harry, deﬁnitely for the ﬁrst time in his life, was
terriﬁed that he’d lost her as a friend; and she’d started to feel (a) guilty
and (b) worried about the direction Harry’s increasingly desperate oﬀers
were going. But she still had no idea what sort of apology was appropriate, so she’d said that the Ravenclaw girls should vote on it—and this
time she wouldn’t ﬁx the outcome, though she hadn’t mentioned that
part—to which Harry had instantly agreed.
The next day, practically every Ravenclaw girl over the age of thirteen had voted to have Draco drop Harry.
Hermione had felt mildly disappointed it was that simple, though it
was obviously fair.

“R

*

697 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Right now, however, standing just outside the great doors of the castle amid half the female population of Hogwarts, Hermione was beginning to suspect that there were things going on here that she did not
understand and that she desperately hoped neither of her fellow generals ever heard about.

**
*
You couldn’t really see the details from up there, just the general fact of
a sea of expectant female faces.
“You’ve got no idea what this is about, do you?” said Draco, sounding
amused.
Harry had read a fair number of books he wasn’t supposed to read,
not to mention a few Quibbler headlines.
“Boy-Who-Lived gets Draco Malfoy pregnant?” said Harry.
“Okay, you do know what this is about,” said Draco. “I thought
Muggles hated that?”
“Only the dumb ones,” said Harry. “But, um, aren’t we, uh, a little
young?”
“Not too young for them,” said Draco. He snorted. “Girls!”
They silently walked toward the edge of the roof.
“So I’m doing this for revenge on you,” said Draco, “but why are you
doing this?”
Harry’s mind made a lightning calculation, weighing the factors,
whether it was too soon...
“Honestly?” said Harry. “Because I meant to have her climb up the
icy walls, but I didn’t mean to have her fall oﬀ the roof. And, um, I
kinda did feel really awful about that. I mean, I guess I actually did start
seeing her as my friendly rival after a while. So this is a real apology to
her, not a plot or anything.”
There was a pause.
Then—
“Yeah,” said Draco. “I understand.”
*

698 *

**
*

COURAGE

*
*

*

Harry didn’t smile. It might have been the most diﬃcult nonsmile
of his life.
Draco looked at the edge of the roof, and made a face. “This is going
to be a lot harder to do on purpose than by accident, isn’t it.”

**
*
Harry’s other hand held the roof in a reﬂexively terriﬁed grip, his ﬁngers
white on the cold, cold stone.
You could know with your conscious mind that you’d drunk the
Feather-Falling Potion. Knowing it with your unconscious mind was
another matter entirely.
It was every bit as scary as Harry had thought it might have been for
Hermione, which was justice.
“Draco,” said Harry, controlling his voice wasn’t easy, but the
Ravenclaw girls had given them a script, “You’ve got to let me go!”
“Okay!” said Draco, and let go of Harry’s arm.
Harry’s other hand scrabbled at the edge, and then, without any decision being made, his ﬁngers failed, and Harry fell.
There was a brief moment when Harry’s stomach tried to leap up
into his throat, and his body tried desperately to orient itself in the absence of any possible way to do so.
There was a brief moment when Harry could feel the Feather-Falling
Potion kicking in, starting to slow him, a sort of lurching, cushioning
feeling.
And then something pulled on Harry and he accelerated downward
again faster than gravity—
Harry’s mouth had already opened and begun screaming while part
of his brain tried to think of something creative he could do, part of his
brain tried to calculate how much time he had left to be creative, and a
tiny rump part of his brain noticed that he wasn’t even going to ﬁnish
the remaining-time calculation before he hit the ground—

**
*
*

699 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Harry was desperately trying to control his hyperventilating, and it
wasn’t helping him to hear the shrieking of all the girls, now lying in
heaps on the ground and each other.
“Good heavens,” said the unfamiliar man, he of the old-looking
clothes and faintly scarred face, who was holding Harry in his arms. “Of
all the ways I imagined we might meet again someday, I didn’t expect it
to be you falling out of the sky.”
Harry remembered the last thing he’d seen, the falling body, and
managed to gasp, “Professor... Quirrell...”
“He’ll be all right after a few hours,” said the unfamiliar man holding
Harry. “He’s just exhausted. I wouldn’t have thought it possible... he
must have knocked down two hundred students just to make sure he got
whoever was jinxing you...”
Gently, the man set Harry upright on the ground, supporting him
the while.
Harry carefully balanced himself, and nodded to the man.
He let go, and Harry promptly fell over.
The man helped him rise again. Making sure, at all times, to stand between Harry and the girls now picking themselves up from the ground,
his head constantly glancing in that direction.
“Harry,” the man said quietly, and very seriously, “do you have any
idea which of these girls might have wanted to kill you?”
“Not murder,” said a strained voice. “Just stupidity.”
This time it was the unfamiliar man who seemed to almost fall over,
utter shock on his face.
Professor Quirrell was already sitting up from where he’d fallen on
the grass.
“Good heavens!” gasped the man. “You shouldn’t be—”
“Mr. Lupin, your concerns are misplaced. No wizard, no matter how
powerful, casts such a Charm by strength alone. You must do it by being
eﬃcient.”
Professor Quirrell didn’t stand up, though.
“Thank you,” Harry whispered. And then, “Thank you,” to the man

*

700 *

**
*

COURAGE

*
*

*

standing beside him as well.
“What happened?” said the man.
“I should have foreseen it myself,” Professor Quirrell said, his voice
crisp with disapproval. “Some number of girls tried to summon Mr. Potter to their own, particular arms. Individually, I suppose, they all
thought they were being gentle.”
Oh.
“Consider it a lesson in preparedness, Mr. Potter,” said Professor
Quirrell. “Had I not insisted that there be more than one adult witness
to this little event, and that both of us have our wands out, Mr. Lupin
would not have been available to slow your fall afterward, and you would
have been gravely injured.”
“Sir!” said the man—Mr. Lupin, apparently. “You should not say
such things to the boy!”
“Who is—” Harry started to say.
“The only other person who was available to watch, besides myself,”
said Professor Quirrell. “I introduce you to Remus Lupin, who is here
temporarily to instruct students in the Patronus Charm. Though I am
told that the two of you have already met.”
Harry studied the man, puzzled. He should have remembered that
faintly scarred face, that strange, gentle smile.
“Where did we meet?” said Harry.
“In Godric’s Hollow,” said the man. “I changed a number of your
diapers.”

**
*
Mr. Lupin’s temporary oﬃce was a small stone room with a small
wooden desk, and Harry couldn’t see anything of what Mr. Lupin was
sitting on, suggesting that it was a small stool just like the one in front
of his desk. Harry guessed that Mr. Lupin wouldn’t be at Hogwarts for
long, or use this oﬃce much, and so he’d told the house elves not to waste
the eﬀort. It said something about a person that he tried not to bother
house elves. Speciﬁcally, it said that he’d been Sorted into Huﬄepuﬀ,
since, to the best of Harry’s knowledge, Hermione was the only non*

701 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Huﬄepuﬀ who worried about bothering house elves. (Harry himself
thought her qualms rather silly. Whoever had created house elves in the
ﬁrst place had been unspeakably evil, obviously; but that didn’t mean
Hermione was doing the right thing now by denying sentient beings the
drudgery they had been shaped to enjoy.)
“Please sit down, Harry,” the man said quietly. His formal robes
were of low quality, not quite tattered, but visibly worn by the passage
of time in a way that simple Repair Charms couldn’t ﬁx; shabby was the
word that came to mind. And despite that, somehow, there was a dignity
about him that couldn’t have been obtained by ﬁne and expensive robes,
that wouldn’t have ﬁt with ﬁne robes, that was the exclusive property of
the shabby. Harry had heard of humility, but he’d never seen the real
thing before—only the satisﬁed modesty of people who thought it was
part of their style and wanted you to notice.
Harry took a seat on the small wooden stool in front of Mr. Lupin’s
short desk.
“Thank you for coming,” the man said.
“No, thank you for saving me,” said Harry. “Let me know if you
ever need something impossible done.”
The man seemed to hesitate. “Harry, may I... ask a personal question?”
“You can ask, certainly,” Harry said. “I have a lot of questions for
you, too.”
Mr. Lupin nodded. “Harry, are your stepparents treating you well?”
“My parents,” Harry said. “I have four. Michael, James, Petunia, and
Lily.”
“Ah,” said Mr. Lupin. And then, “Ah” again. He seemed to be blinking rather hard. “I... that is good to hear, Harry, Dumbledore would tell
none of us where you were... I was afraid he might think you ought to
have wicked stepparents, or some such... “
Harry wasn’t sure Mr. Lupin’s concern had been misplaced, considering his own ﬁrst encounter with Dumbledore; but it had all turned out
well enough, so he said nothing. “What about my...” Harry searched for
a word that didn’t raise them higher or put them lower... “other parents?
I want to know, well, everything.”
*

702 *

**
*

COURAGE

*
*

*

“A tall order,” Mr. Lupin said. He wiped a hand across his forehead.
“Well, let us begin at the beginning. When you were born, James was
so happy that he couldn’t touch his wand without it glowing gold, for
a whole week. And even after that, whenever he held you, or saw Lily
holding you, or just thought of you, it would happen again. James was
an Auror, and it was hard for him to look properly imposing with his
wand shining like that—”
“A tall order,” Mr. Lupin said. He wiped a hand across his forehead.
“Well, let us begin at the beginning. When you were born, James was
so happy that he couldn’t touch his wand without it glowing gold, for
a whole week. And even after that, whenever he held you, or saw Lily
holding you, or just thought of you, it would happen again—”

**
*
Every now and then Harry would look at his watch, and ﬁnd that another thirty minutes had passed. He felt slightly bad about making Remus miss dinner, especially since Harry himself would just drop back to
7pm later, but that wasn’t enough to stop either of them.
Finally Harry screwed up enough courage to ask the critical question,
while Remus was in the middle of an extended discourse on the wonders
of James’s Quidditch that Harry couldn’t ﬁnd the heart to squash more
directly.
“And that was when,” Remus said, his eyes shining brightly, “James
pulled oﬀ a triple reverse Mulhanney Dive with extra backspin! The whole
crowd went wild, even some of the Huﬄepuﬀs were cheering—”
I guess you had to be there, Harry thought—not that being there would
have helped in any way—and said, “Mr. Lupin?”
Something about Harry’s voice must have reached the man, because
he stopped in mid-sentence.
“Was my father a bully?” said Harry.
Remus looked at Harry for a long moment. “For a little while,”
Remus said. “He grew out of it soon enough. Where did you hear that?”
*

703 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Harry didn’t answer, he was trying to think of something true to say
that would deﬂect suspicion, but he didn’t think fast enough.
“Never mind,” said Remus, and sighed. “I can guess who.” The
faintly scarred face was pinched in disapproval. “What a thing to tell—”
“Did my father have any extenuating circumstances?” Harry said.
“Poor home life, or something like that? Or was he just... being naturally
nasty?” Cold?
Remus’s hand swept his hair back, the ﬁrst nervous gesture Harry
had seen from him. “Harry,” Remus said, “you can’t judge your father
by what he did as a young boy!”
“I’m a young boy,” Harry said, “and I judge myself.”
Remus blinked twice at that.
“I want to know why,” Harry said. “I want to understand, because to
me, it seems like there isn’t any possible excuse for that!” Voice shaking
a bit. “Please tell me anything you know about why he did it, even if it
doesn’t sound nice.” So I don’t fall into the same trap myself, whatever it
is.
“It was the thing to do if you were in Gryﬃndor,” Remus said, slowly,
reluctantly. “And... I didn’t think so back then, I thought it was the
other way around, but... it might have been Black who got James into
it, really... Black wanted so much to show everyone that he was against
Slytherin, you see, we all wanted to believe that blood wasn’t destiny—”

**
*
“No, Harry,” said Remus. “I don’t know why Black went after Peter
instead of running. It was as though Black was making tragedy for the
sake of tragedy that day.” The man’s voice was unsteady. “There was no
hint, no warning, we all thought—to think that he was to be—” Remus’s
voice cut oﬀ.
Harry was crying, he couldn’t help it, it hurt worse to hear it from
Remus than anything he’d ever felt himself. Harry had lost two parents
he didn’t remember, knew only from stories. Remus Lupin had lost all
four of his best friends in less than twenty-four hours; and for the loss
*

704 *

**
*

COURAGE

*
*

*

of his last remaining one, Peter Pettigrew, there’d just been no reason at
all.
“Sometimes it still hurts to think of him in Azkaban,” Remus ﬁnished, his voice almost a whisper. “I am glad, Harry, that Death Eaters
are not allowed visitors. It means I do not have to feel ashamed of not
going.”
Harry had to swallow hard several times before he could speak. “Can
you tell me about Peter Pettigrew? He was my father’s friend, and it
seems—that I should know, that I should remember—”
Remus nodded, water glittering in his own eyes now. “I think,
Harry, that if Peter had known it would end that way—” the man’s
voice choked up. “Peter was more afraid of the Dark Lord than any
of us, and if he’d known it would end that way, I don’t think he would
have done it. But Peter knew the risk, Harry, he knew the risk was
real, that it could happen, and yet he stayed by James and Lily’s side.
All through Hogwarts I used to wonder why Peter hadn’t been sorted
into Slytherin, or maybe Ravenclaw, because Peter so adored secrets, he
couldn’t resist them, he would ﬁnd out things about people, things they
wanted kept hidden—” A brief wry look crossed Remus’s face. “But he
didn’t use those secrets, Harry. He just wanted to know. And then the
Dark Lord’s shadow fell over everything, and Peter stood by James and
Lily and put his talents to good use, and I understood why the Hat had
sent him to Gryﬃndor.” Remus’s voice was ﬁerce now, and proud. “It’s
easy to stand by your friends if you’re a hero like Godric, bold and strong
like people think Gryﬃndors should be. But if Peter was more afraid
than any of us, doesn’t that also make him the most brave?”
“It does,” Harry said. His own voice was choked to where he almost
couldn’t talk. “If you could, Mr. Lupin, if you have time, there’s someone else who I think should hear Peter Pettigrew’s story, a student in
ﬁrst-year Huﬄepuﬀ, named Neville Longbottom.”
“Alice and Frank’s boy,” said Remus, his voice turning sad. “I see. It
is not a happy story, Harry, but I can tell it again, if you think it will
help him.”
Harry nodded.
A brief silence fell.
*

705 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-TWO

*
*

*

“Did Black have any unﬁnished business with Peter Pettigrew?”
Harry said. “Anything that would make him seek out Mr. Pettigrew,
even if it wasn’t a killing matter? Like a secret Mr. Pettigrew knew, that
Black wanted to know himself, or wanted to kill him to hide?”
Something ﬂickered in Remus’s eyes, but the older man shook his
head, and said, “Not really.”
“That means there is something,” said Harry.
That wry smile appeared again beneath the salt-and-pepper mustache. “You have a bit of Peter in you yourself, I see. But it’s not important, Harry.”
“I’m a Ravenclaw, I’m not supposed to resist the temptation of secrets.
And,” Harry said more seriously, “if it was worth Black getting caught,
I can’t help but think it might matter.”
Remus looked quite uncomfortable. “I suppose I could tell you when
you’re older, but really, Harry, it’s not important! Just something from
our school days.”
Harry couldn’t have put his ﬁnger on exactly what tipped him oﬀ; it
might have been something about the exact tone of nervousness in Remus’s voice, or the way the man had said when you’re older, that sparked
the sudden leap of Harry’s intuition...
“Actually,” said Harry, “I think I’ve sort of guessed it already, sorry.”
Remus raised his eyebrows. “Have you?” He sounded a bit skeptical.
“They were lovers, weren’t they?”
There was an awkward pause.
Remus gave a slow, grave nod.
“Once,” Remus said. “A long time ago. A sad aﬀair, ending in vast
tragedy, or so it seemed to us all when we were young.” The unhappy
puzzlement was plain on his face. “But I had thought that long since
over and done and buried beneath adult friendship, until the day that
Black killed Peter.”

*

706 *

CHAPTER

FORT Y-THREE

HUMANISM, PART I
he gentle sun of January shone on the cold ﬁelds outside Hogwarts.
For some of the students it was a study hour, and others had
been let out of class. The ﬁrst-years who’d signed up for it were practicing a certain spell, a spell that was most advantageously learned outdoors, beneath the bright sun and a clear blue sky, rather than within the
conﬁnes of any classroom. Cookies and lemonade were also considered
helpful.
The early gestures of the spell were complex and precise; you
twitched your wand once, twice, thrice, and four times with small tilts at
exactly the right relative angles, you shifted your foreﬁnger and thumb
exactly the right distances...
The Ministry thought this meant it was futile to try and teach anyone
the spell before their ﬁfth year. There had been a few known cases of
younger children learning it, and this had been dismissed as “genius”.
It might not have been a very polite way of putting it, but Harry
was beginning to see why Professor Quirrell had claimed that the Ministry Committee of Curriculum would have been of greater beneﬁt to
wizardkind if they had been used as landﬁll.
So the gestures were complicated and delicate. That didn’t stop you
from learning it when you were eleven. It meant you had to be extra
careful and practice each part for a lot longer than usual, that was all.
Most Charms that could only be learned by older students were like
that because they required more strength of magic than any young student could muster. But the Patronus Charm wasn’t like that, it wasn’t
diﬃcult because it needed too much magic, it was diﬃcult because it
took more than mere magic.

T

*

707 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

It took the warm, happy feelings that you kept close in your heart,
the loving memories, a diﬀerent kind of strength that you didn’t need
for ordinary spells.
Harry twitched his wand once, twice, thrice and four times, shifted
his ﬁngers exactly the right distances...
“Good luck at school, Harry. Do you think I bought you enough books?”
“You can never have enough books... but you certainly tried, it was a
really, really, really good try...”
It had brought tears to his eyes, the ﬁrst time Harry had remembered
and tried to put it into the spell.
Harry brought the wand up and around and brandished it, a gesture
that didn’t have to be precise, only bold and deﬁant.
“Expecto Patronum!” cried Harry.
Nothing happened.
Not a single ﬂicker of light.
When Harry looked up, Remus Lupin was still studying the wand,
a rather troubled look on his faintly scarred face.
Finally Remus shook his head. “I’m sorry, Harry,” the man said
quietly. “Your wandwork was exactly right.”
And there wasn’t a ﬂicker of light anywhere else, either, because all
the other ﬁrst-years who were supposed to be practicing their Patronus
Charms had been glancing out of the corners of their eyes at Harry instead.
The tears were threatening to come back into Harry’s eyes, and they
weren’t happy tears. Of all the things, of all the things, Harry had never
expected this.
There was something horribly humiliating about being informed
that you weren’t happy enough.
What did Anthony Goldstein have inside him that Harry didn’t, that
made Anthony’s wand shine with that bright light?
Did Anthony love his own father more?
“What thought were you using to cast it?” said Remus.
“My father,” Harry said, his voice trembling. “I asked him to buy
me some books before I came to Hogwarts, and he did, and they were
expensive, and then he asked me if they were enough—”
*

708 *

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

Harry didn’t try to explain about the Verres family motto.
“Take a rest before you try a diﬀerent thought, Harry,” said Remus. He gestured toward where some other students were sitting on the
ground, looking disappointed or embarrassed or regretful. “You won’t
be able to cast a Patronus Charm while you’re feeling ashamed of not
being grateful enough.” There was a gentle compassion in Mr. Lupin’s
voice, and for a moment, Harry felt like hitting something.
Instead Harry turned around, and stalked to where the other failures were sitting. The other students whose wandwork had also been
proclaimed perfect, and who were now supposed to be searching for happier thoughts; by the looks of them they weren’t making much progress.
There were many robes there trimmed in dark blue, and a handful of red,
and one lone Huﬄepuﬀ girl who was still crying. The Slytherins hadn’t
even bothered showing up, except for Daphne Greengrass and Tracey
Davis, who were still trying to get the gestures.
Harry plopped down on the cold dead grass of winter, next to the
student whose failure had surprised him the most.
“So you couldn’t do it either,” Hermione said. She’d ﬂed the ﬁeld at
ﬁrst, but she’d come back after that, and you had to look closely at her
reddened eyes to see that she’d been crying.
“I,” Harry said, “I, I’d probably feel a lot worse about that if you
hadn’t failed, you’re the nicest, person I know, that I’ve ever met, Hermione, and if you also can’t do it, it means I might still be, be good...”
“I should have gone to Gryﬃndor,” Hermione whispered. She
blinked hard a few times, but she didn’t wipe her eyes.

**
*
The boy and the girl walked forward together, deﬁnitely not holding
hands, but each drawing a kind of strength from the other’s presence,
something that let them ignore the whispers of their year-mates, as they
walked through the hallway approaching the great doors of Hogwarts.
Harry hadn’t been able to cast the Patronus Charm no matter what
happy thought he tried. People hadn’t seemed surprised by that, which
*

709 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

made it even worse. Hermione hadn’t been able to do it either. People
had been very surprised by that, and Harry had seen her starting to get
the same sidelong looks as him. The other Ravenclaws who’d failed
weren’t getting those looks. But Hermione was the Sunshine General,
and her fans were treating it like she’d failed them, somehow, like she’d
betrayed a promise she’d never made.
The two of them had gone to the library to research the Patronus
Charm, which was Hermione’s way of dealing with distress, as it was
sometimes also Harry’s. Study, learn, try to understand why...
The books had conﬁrmed what the Headmaster had told Harry; often, wizards who couldn’t cast the Patronus Charm in practice would be
able to do so in the presence of a real Dementor, going from ﬂat failure
all the way to a full corporeal Patronus. It deﬁed all logic, the Dementor’s aura of fear ought to make it harder to wield a happy thought; but
that was the way it was.
So the two of them were both going to give it one last try, there was
no way either of them wouldn’t give it one last try.
It was the day the Dementor came to Hogwarts.
Earlier, Harry had unTransﬁgured his father’s rock from where it
usually rested on his pinky ring in the form of a tiny diamond, and
placed the huge gray stone back into his pouch. Just in case Harry’s
magic failed entirely, when he confronted the darkest of all creatures.
Harry had already started to feel pessimistic, and he wasn’t even in
front of a Dementor yet.
“I bet you can do it and I can’t,” Harry said in a whisper. “I bet that’s
what happens.”
“It felt wrong to me,” Hermione said, her voice even quieter than his.
“I tried it this morning and I realized. When I was doing the brandish at
the end, even before I said the words, it felt wrong.”
Harry didn’t say anything. He’d felt the same thing, right from the
start, though it had taken another ﬁve attempts using ﬁve other happy
thoughts before he’d been able to acknowledge it to himself. Every time
he tried to brandish his wand, it had felt hollow; the spell he was trying
to learn didn’t ﬁt him.
“It doesn’t mean we’re going to be Dark Wizards,” said Harry. “Lots
*

710

*

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

of people who can’t cast the Patronus Charm aren’t Dark Wizards. Godric Gryﬃndor wasn’t a Dark Wizard...”
Godric had defeated Dark Lords, fought to protect commoners from
Noble Houses and Muggles from wizards. He’d had many ﬁne friends
and true, and lost no more than half of them in one good cause or another. He’d listened to the screams of the wounded, in the armies he’d
raised to defend the innocent; young wizards of courage had rallied to his
calls, and he’d buried them afterward. Until ﬁnally, when his wizardry
had only just begun to fail him in his old age, he’d brought together the
three other most powerful wizards of his era to raise Hogwarts from
the bare ground; the one great accomplishment to Godric’s name that
wasn’t about war, any kind of war, no matter how just. It was Salazar,
and not Godric, who’d taught the ﬁrst Hogwarts class in Battle Magic.
Godric had taught the ﬁrst Hogwarts class in Herbology, the magics of
green growing life.
To his last day he’d never been able to cast the Patronus Charm.
Godric Gryﬃndor had been a good man, not a happy one.
Harry didn’t believe in angst, he couldn’t stand reading about whiny
heroes, he knew a billion other people in the world would have given
anything to trade places with him, and...
And on his deathbed, Godric had told Helga (for Salazar had abandoned him, and Rowena passed before) that he didn’t regret any of it,
and he was not warning his students not to follow in his footsteps, no
one was ever to say he’d told anyone not to follow in his footsteps. If it
had been the right thing for him to do, then he wouldn’t tell anyone else
to choose wrongly, not even the youngest student in Hogwarts. And yet
for those who did follow in his footsteps, he hoped they would remember that Gryﬃndor had told his House that it was all right for them to
be happier than him. That red and gold would be bright warm colors,
from now on.
And Helga had promised him, weeping, that when she was Headmistress she would make sure of it.
Whereupon Godric had died, and left no ghost behind him; and
Harry had shoved the book back to Hermione and walked away a little,
so she wouldn’t see him crying.
*

711

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

You wouldn’t think that a book with an innocent title like “The Patronus Charm: Wizards Who Could and Couldn’t” would be the saddest
book Harry had ever read.
Harry...
Harry didn’t want that.
To be in that book.
Harry didn’t want that.
The rest of the school just seemed to think that No Patronus meant
Bad Person, plain and simple. Somehow the fact that Godric Gryﬃndor
also hadn’t been able to cast the Patronus Charm seemed not to get repeated. Maybe people didn’t talk about it to respect his last wish, Fred
and George probably didn’t know and Harry certainly wasn’t about to
tell them. Or maybe the other failures didn’t mention it because it was
less shameful, the smaller loss of pride and status, to be thought Dark
rather than unhappy.
Harry saw that Hermione, beside him, was blinking hard; and he
wondered if she was thinking of Rowena Ravenclaw, who’d also loved
books.
“Okay,” Harry whispered. “Happier thoughts. If you do go to a full
corporeal Patronus, what do you think your animal will be?”
“An otter,” Hermione said at once.
“An otter?” Harry whispered incredulously.
“Yes, an otter,” said Hermione. “What about yours?”
“Peregrine falcon,” Harry said without hesitation. “It can dive faster
than three hundred kilometers per hour, it’s the fastest living creature
there is.” The peregrine falcon had been Harry’s favorite animal since
forever. Harry was determined to become an Animagus someday, just
to get that as his form, and ﬂy by the strength of his own wings, and see
the land below with sharper eyes... “But why an otter?”
Hermione smiled, but didn’t say anything.
And the vast doors of Hogwarts swung open.
They walked for a time, the children, over a pathway that led toward
the unforbidden forest, and continued through the forest itself. The Sun
was lowering to near the horizon, the shadows long, the sunlight ﬁltered
through the bare branches of the winter trees; for it was January, and the
*

712

*

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

ﬁrst-years the last to learn, that day.
Then the path swerved and took a new direction, and they all saw it
in the distance, the clearing in the forest, and the sere winter grounds,
yellowing dried grass whitened by a few small remnants of snow.
The human ﬁgures still small at that range. The two spots of dim
white light from the Aurors’ Patronuses, and the brighter spot of silver
light from the Headmaster’s, next to something...
Harry squinted.
Something...
It must have been purely Harry’s imagination, because there
shouldn’t have been any way for a Dementor to reach past three corporeal Patronuses, but he thought he could feel a touch of emptiness
brushing at his mind, brushing straight at the soft inner center of himself without any respect for Occlumency barriers.

**
*
Seamus Finnigan was ashen and trembling as he rejoined the students
milling about on the withered and snow-spotted grass. Seamus’s Patronus Charm had been successful, but there was still that interval between when the Headmaster dispelled his own Patronus and when you
were supposed to cast your own, when you faced the Dementor’s fear
unshielded.
Up to twenty seconds of exposure at ﬁve paces was certainly safe,
even for an eleven-year-old wizard with weak resistance and a stillmaturing brain. There was a lot of variance in how hard the Dementor’s power hit people, which was another thing not quite understood;
but twenty seconds was deﬁnitely safe.
Forty seconds of Dementor exposure at ﬁve paces might possibly have
been enough to cause permanent damage, though only to the most sensitive subjects.
It was harsh training even by the standards of Hogwarts, where the
way you learned to ﬂy on a hippogriﬀ was by being tossed on one and
told to get going. Harry was no fan of overprotectiveness, and if you
*

713

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

looked at the diﬀerence in maturity between a fourth-year in Hogwarts
and a fourteen-year-old Muggle, it was clear that Muggles were smothering their children... but even Harry had started to wonder if this was
pushing it. Not every hurt could be healed afterward.
But if you couldn’t cast the spell under those conditions, it meant you
couldn’t rely on using the Patronus Charm to defend yourself; overconﬁdence was even more dangerous to wizards than to Muggles. Dementors
could drain your magic and your physical vitality, not just your happy
thoughts, which meant you might not be able to Apparate away if you
waited too long, or if you didn’t recognize the approaching fear until the
Dementor was within range for its attack. (During his reading, Harry
had discovered with considerable horror that some books claimed the
Dementor’s Kiss would eat your soul and that this was the reason for
the permanent mindless coma into which it put the victims. And that
wizards who believed this had deliberately used the Dementor’s Kiss to
execute criminals. It was a certainty that some called criminals were innocent, and even if they weren’t, destroying their souls? If Harry had
believed in souls, he would have... drawn a blank, he just couldn’t think
of an appropriate response to that.)
The Headmaster was taking security seriously, and so were the three
Aurors standing guard. Their leader was an Asianish-looking man,
solemn without being grim, Auror Komodo, whose wand never left his
hand. His Patronus, an orangutan of solid moonlight, paced back and
forth between the Dementor and the ﬁrst-years awaiting their turn; beside the orangutan moved the bright white panther of Auror Butnaru,
a man with a piercing gaze, long black hair in a ponytail, and a long
braided goatee. Those two Aurors, and their two Patronuses, were all
watching the Dementor. On the opposite side of the students was the
resting Auror Goryanof, tall and thin and pale and unshaven, sitting
back on a chair he’d conjured without word or wand, and maintaining an absentminded pokerface as he scanned the entire scene. Professor
Quirrell had shown up not long after the ﬁrst-years began their attempts,
and his eyes never strayed far from Harry. The tiny Professor Flitwick,
who had been a champion duellist, was ﬁddling absently with his wand;
and his eyes, peering out from within the huge puﬀy beard that served
*

714

*

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

as his face, stayed focused on Professor Quirrell.
And it must have been Harry’s imagination, but Professor Quirrell
seemed to wince slightly each time the Headmaster’s Patronus winked
out to test the next student. Maybe Professor Quirrell was imagining
the same placebo eﬀect as Harry, that backwash of emptiness caressing
at his mind.
“Anthony Goldstein,” called the voice of the Headmaster.
Harry quietly walked toward Seamus, even as Anthony began to approach the shining silver phoenix, and... whatever it was beneath the
tattered cloak.
“What did you see?” Harry asked Seamus in a low voice.
A lot of students hadn’t answered Harry, when he’d tried to gather
the data; but Seamus was Finnigan of Chaos, one of Harry’s lieutenants.
Maybe that wasn’t fair, but...
“Dead,” said Seamus in a whisper, “grayish and slimy... dead and left
in water for a while... “
Harry nodded. “That’s what a lot of people see,” Harry said. He
projected conﬁdence, even though it was fake, because Seamus needed
it. “Go eat some chocolate, you’ll feel better.”
Seamus nodded and stumbled oﬀ toward the table of healing sweets.
“Expecto Patronum!” cried a young boy’s voice.
Then there were gasps of shock, even from the Aurors.
Harry spun around to look—
There was a brilliant silver bird standing between Anthony Goldstein and the cage. The bird reared its head and let out a cry, and the cry
was also silver, as bright and hard and beautiful as metal.
And something in the back of Harry’s mind said, if that’s a peregrine
falcon, I’m going to strangle him in his sleep.
Shut up, Harry said to the thought, do you want us to be a Dark Wizard?
What’s the point? You’re going to end up as one eventually.
That... wasn’t something Harry would usually have thought...
It’s a placebo eﬀect, Harry told himself again. The Dementor can’t
actually get to me through three corporeal Patronuses, I’m just imagining
what I think it’s like. When I actually face the Dementor, it’ll feel completely
*

715

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

diﬀerent, and then I’ll know I was just being silly before.
A slight chill went down Harry’s spine then, because he had a feeling
that yes, it would be completely diﬀerent, and not in a positive direction.
The blazing silver phoenix sprang back into existence from the Headmaster’s wand, the lesser bird vanished; and Anthony Goldstein began
to walk back.
The Headmaster was coming with Anthony instead of calling out
the next name, the Patronus waiting behind to guard the Dementor.
Harry glanced over to where Hermione was standing, just behind
the glowing panther. Hermione’s turn would have come next, but had
apparently just been delayed.
She looked stressed.
Earlier, she’d politely asked Harry to please stop trying to destress
her.
Dumbledore was smiling slightly as he escorted Anthony back toward the others; smiling only slightly, because the Headmaster looked
very, very tired.
“Unbelievable,” said Dumbledore in a voice that sounded much
weaker than his accustomed boom. “A corporeal Patronus, in his ﬁrst
year. And an astounding number of successes among the other young
students. Quirinus, I must acknowledge that you have proved your
point.”
Professor Quirrell inclined his head. “A simple enough guess, I
should think. A Dementor attacks through fear, and children are less
afraid.”
“Less afraid?” said Auror Goryanof from where he was sitting.
“So I said as well,” said Dumbledore. “And Professor Quirrell
pointed out that adults had more courage, not less to fear; which
thought, I confess, had never occurred to me before.”
“That was not my precise phrasing,” Professor Quirrell said dryly,
“but it will do. And the rest of our agreement, Headmaster?”
Dumbledore looked wry, for a moment. “As you say. I admit I
was not expecting to lose that bet, Quirinus, but you have proven your
wisdom.”
All the students were looking at them, puzzled; except Hermione,
*

716

*

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

who was staring in the direction of the cage and the tall decaying robes;
and Harry, who was watching everyone, since he was imagining himself
feeling paranoid.
Professor Quirrell said, in tones that did not invite further comments, “I am allowed to teach the Killing Curse to students who wish to
learn it. Which will render them considerably safer from Dark Wizards
and other pests, and it is foolish to think they will otherwise know no
deadly magics.” Professor Quirrell paused, his eyes narrowing. “Headmaster, I respectfully observe that you are not looking well. I suggest
leaving the remainder of the day’s task to Professor Flitwick.”
Dumbledore shook his head. “We are almost done for the day, Quirinus. I will last.”
Hermione had approached Anthony. “Captain Goldstein,” she said,
and her voice trembled only a little, “can you give me any advice?”
“Don’t be afraid,” Anthony said ﬁrmly. “Don’t think about anything it tries to make you think about. You’re not just holding up the
wand in front of you as a shield against the fear, you’re brandishing your
wand to drive the fear away, that’s how you make a happy thought into
something solid...” Anthony shrugged helplessly. “I mean, I heard all
that before, but...”
Other students were starting to congregate around Anthony, with
their own questions.
“Miss Granger?” the Headmaster said. His voice might have been
gentle, or just weakened.
Hermione straightened her shoulders, and followed him.
“What did you see under the cloak?” Harry said to Anthony.
Anthony looked at Harry, surprised, and then answered, “A very
tall man who was dead, I mean, sort of dead-shaped and dead-colored...
it hurt to see him and I knew that was the Dementor trying to get at
me.”
Harry looked back out at where Hermione was confronting the cage
and the cloak.
Hermione raised her wand into position for the ﬁrst gestures.
The Headmaster’s phoenix winked out of existence.
And Hermione gave a tiny, pathetic shriek, ﬂinched—
*

717

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

—took a step back, Harry could see her wand moving, and then she
brandished it and said “Expecto Patronum!”
Nothing happened.
Hermione turned and ran.
“Expecto Patronum!” said the Headmaster’s deeper voice, and the silver phoenix blazed back to life.
The young girl stumbled, and kept running, strange sounds beginning to come from her throat.
“Hermione!” Susan yelled it, and Hannah, and Daphne, and Ernie,
and they all started to run toward her; even as Harry, who was always
thinking one step ahead, spun on his own heel and ran for the table with
the chocolate.
Even after Harry had shoved the chocolate into Hermione’s mouth
and she’d chewed and swallowed, she was still breathing in great gasps
and crying, her eyes still seemed unfocused.
She can’t have been permanently Demented, Harry thought desperately at the confusion inside him, the horrible fear and deathly fury beginning to twist around each other, she can’t have been, she wasn’t exposed
for even ten seconds let alone forty—
But she could be temporarily Demented, as Harry realized in that
moment, there wasn’t any rule that you couldn’t be temporarily injured
by a Dementor in just ten seconds if you were sensitive enough.
Then Hermione’s eyes seemed to focus, and dart around, and settle
on him.
“Harry,” she gasped, and the other students went silent. “Harry,
don’t. Don’t!”
Harry was suddenly afraid to ask what he shouldn’t do, was he in her
worst memories, or some sleep’s nightmare that she was now reliving in
waking life?
“Don’t go near it!” said Hermione. Her hand reached out, grabbed
him by the lapel of his robes. “You mustn’t go near it, Harry! It spoke
to me, Harry, it knows you, it knows you’re here!”
“What—” Harry said, and then cursed himself for asking.
“The Dementor!” said Hermione. Her voice rose to a shriek. “Professor Quirrell wants it to eat you!”
*

718

*

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

In the sudden hush, Professor Quirrell came forward a few steps;
but he didn’t approach any closer (Harry was there, after all). “Miss
Granger,” he said, and his voice was grave, “I think you should have
some more chocolate.”
“Professor Flitwick, don’t let Harry try, send him back!”
The Headmaster had arrived by then, and he and Professor Flitwick
were exchanging worried looks.
“I did not hear the Dementor speak,” the Headmaster said. “Still...”
“Just ask,” said Professor Quirrell, sounding a little weary.
“Did the Dementor say how it would get to Harry?” said the Headmaster.
“All his tastiest parts ﬁrst,” said Hermione, “it would—it would
eat—”
Hermione blinked. Some sanity seemed to come back into her eyes.
Then she started crying.
“You were too brave, Hermione Granger,” the Headmaster said. His
voice was gentle, and clearly audible. “Too much braver than I comprehended. You should have turned and run, not endured and tried to complete your Charm. When you are older and stronger, Miss Granger, I
know that you will try again, and I know that you will succeed.”
“I’m sorry,” Hermione said in gasps, “I’m sorry, I’m sorry, I’m
sorry... I’m sorry, Harry, I can’t tell you what I saw, I didn’t look at it,
I didn’t dare look at it, I knew it was too horrible to ever be seen...”
It should have been Harry, but he’d hesitated, because his hands were
all chocolatey; and then Ernie and Susan were there, helping Hermione
from where she’d fallen on the grass, leading her toward the snacks table.
Five bars of chocolate later, Hermione seemed to be all right again,
and she went over and apologized to Professor Quirrell; but she was
always watching Harry, every time that he glanced in her direction. He’d
stepped toward her only once, and stopped when she’d stepped away.
Her eyes had silently apologized, and silently pleaded for him to leave
her be.

**
*
*

719

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Neville Longbottom had seen something dead and half-dissolved, oozing
and running with a face like a squashed sponge.
It was the worst thing anyone had yet described seeing. Neville had
been able to produce a small ﬂicker of light from his wand before, but he
had, intelligently and with great presence of mind, turned and run away
instead of trying to cast his own Patronus Charm.
(The Headmaster had said nothing to the other students, told no one
else to be less brave; but Professor Quirrell had calmly observed that
if you made the mistake after being warned, that was when ignorance
became stupidity.)
“Professor Quirrell?” Harry said in a low voice, having come as close
to the Defense Professor as he dared. “What do you see when you—”
“Don’t ask.” The voice was very ﬂat.
Harry nodded respectfully. “What was your original phrasing to the
Headmaster, if I can ask?”
Dryly. “Our worst memories can only grow worse as we grow
older.”
“Ah,” Harry said. “Logical.”
Something strange ﬂickered in Professor Quirrell’s eyes, then, as he
looked at Harry. “Let us hope,” Professor Quirrell said, “that you succeed upon this try, Mr. Potter. For if you do, the Headmaster may
teach you his trick of using a Patronus to send messages that cannot be
forged or intercepted, and the military importance of that is impossible
to overstate. It would be a tremendous advantage to the Chaos Legion,
and someday, I suspect, this entire country. But if you do not succeed,
Mr. Potter... well, I shall understand.”

**
*
Padma Patil had said, in a wavering voice, “Ouch”; she hadn’t screamed
or run, and Dumbledore had recast his Patronus right away.
Parvati Patil had produced a corporeal Patronus in the form of a tiger,
larger than Dumbledore’s phoenix, though not nearly as bright. There
*

720 *

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

had been a great burst of applause from all the watchers, though not the
same shock as when Anthony had done it.
And then it was Harry’s turn.
The Headmaster called the name of Harry Potter, and Harry was
afraid.
Harry knew, he knew that he was going to fail, and he knew that it
was going to hurt.
But he still had to try; because sometimes, in the presence of a Dementor, a wizard went from not a ﬂicker of light to a full corporeal
Patronus, and no one understood why.
And because if Harry couldn’t defend himself from Dementors, he
had to be able to recognize their approach, recognize the feeling of them
in his mind, and run before it was too late.
What is my worst memory...?
Harry had expected the Headmaster to give him a worried look, or
a hopeful look, or deeply wise advice; but instead Albus Dumbledore
only watched him with quiet calm.
He thinks I’m going to fail, but he won’t sabotage me by telling me so,
thought Harry, if he had true words of encouragement to speak, he would
speak them...
The cage came closer. It was already tarnished, but not rusted away
to nothing, not yet.
The cloak came closer. It was unraveling and shot through with unpatched holes; it had been new that morning, Auror Goryanof had said.
“Headmaster?” Harry said. “What do you see?”
The Headmaster’s voice was also calm. “The Dementors are creatures of fear, and as your fear of the Dementor diminishes, so does the
fearsomeness of its form. I see a tall, thin, naked man. He is not decaying. He is only slightly painful to look upon. That is all. What do you
see, Harry?”
...Harry couldn’t see under the cloak.
Or that wasn’t right, it was that his mind was refusing to see what
was under the cloak...
No, his mind was trying to see the wrong thing under the cloak,
Harry could feel it, his eyes trying to force a mistake. But Harry had
*

721

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

done his best to train himself to notice that tiny feeling of confusion,
to automatically ﬂinch away from making stuﬀ up; and every time his
mind tried to start inventing a lie about what was under the cloak, that
reﬂex was fast enough to shut it down.
Harry looked under the cloak and saw...
An open question. Harry wouldn’t let his mind see something false,
and so he didn’t see anything, like the part of his visual cortex getting
that signal was just ceasing to exist. There was a blind spot under the
cloak. Harry couldn’t know what was under there.
Just that it was far worse than any decaying mummy.
The unseeable horror beneath the cloak was very close, now, but the
blazing bird of moonlight, the white phoenix, yet lay between them.
Harry wanted to run away like some of the other students had. Half
the ones who’d had no luck with their Patronus Charms just hadn’t
shown up today in the ﬁrst place. Of those remaining, half had ﬂed
before the Headmaster had even dispelled his own Patronus, and no one
had said a word. There’d been a little laughter when Terry had turned
and walked back before his own try; and Susan and Hannah, who’d gone
before, had yelled at everyone to shut up.
But Harry was the Boy-Who-Lived, and he would lose much respect
if he was seen to give up without even trying...
Pride and roles seemed to diminish and fall away, in the presence of
whatever lay beneath the cloak.
Why am I still here?
It wasn’t the shame of others thinking him cowardly, that kept
Harry’s feet in place.
It wasn’t the hope of repairing his reputation that brought up his
wand.
It wasn’t the desire to master the Patronus Charm as magic, that
moved his ﬁngers into the initial position.
It was something else, something that had to oppose whatever lay
beneath the cloak, this was the true darkness and Harry had to ﬁnd out
whether it lay within him, the power to drive it back.
Harry had planned to try one ﬁnal time to think of his bookshopping spree with his father, but instead, at the last minute, facing the
*

722 *

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

Dementor, a diﬀerent memory occurred to him, something he hadn’t
tried before; a thought that wasn’t warm and happy in the ordinary way,
but felt righter, somehow.
And Harry remembered the stars, remembered them burning terribly bright and unwavering in the Silent Night; he let that image ﬁll him,
ﬁll all of him like an Occlumency barrier across his entire mind, became
once again the bodiless awareness of the void.
The bright silver shining phoenix vanished.
And the Dementor smashed into his mind like the ﬁst of God.
Fear / Cold / Darkness
There was an instant when the two forces clashed head-on, when the
peaceful starlit memory held its own against the fear, even as Harry’s
ﬁngers began the wand motions, practiced until they had become automatic. They weren’t warm and happy, those blazing points of light in
perfect blackness; but it was an image the Dementor could not easily
pierce. For the silent burning stars were vast and unafraid, and to shine
in the cold and darkness was their natural state.
But there was a ﬂaw, a crack, a fault-line in the immovable object
trying to resist that irresistible force. Harry felt a twinge of anger at
the Dementor for trying to feed on him, and it was like slipping on wet
ice. Harry’s mind began to slide sideways, into bitterness, black fury,
deathly hatred—
Harry’s wand came up in the ﬁnal brandish.
It felt wrong.
“Expecto Patronum,” his voice spoke, the words hollow and pointless.
And Harry fell into his dark side, fell down into his dark side, further
and faster and deeper than ever before, down down down as the slide
accelerated, as the Dementor latched onto the exposed and vulnerable
parts and fed on them, eating away the light. A fading reﬂex scrabbled
for warmth, but even as an image of Hermione came to him, or an image
of Mum and Dad, the Dementor twisted it, showed him Hermione lying
*

723 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

dead on the ground, the corpses of his mother and father, and then even
that was sucked away.
Into the vacuum rose the memory, the worst memory, something
forgotten so long ago that the neural patterns shouldn’t have still existed.
“Lily, take Harry and go! It’s him!” shouted a man’s voice. “Go! Run!
I’ll hold him oﬀ!”
And Harry couldn’t help but think, in the empty depths of his dark side,
how ridiculously overconﬁdent James Potter had been. Hold oﬀ Lord Voldemort? With what?
Then the other voice spoke, high-pitched like the hiss of a teakettle, and
it was like dry ice laid on Harry’s every nerve, like a brand of metal cooled
to liquid helium temperatures and laid on every part of him. And the voice
said:
“Avadakedavra.”
(The wand ﬂew from the boy’s nerveless ﬁngers as his body began to
convulse and fall, the Headmaster’s eyes widening in alarm as he began
his own Patronus Charm.)
“Not Harry, not Harry, please not Harry!” screamed the woman’s voice.
Whatever was left of Harry listened with all the light drained out of
him, in the dead void of his heart, and wondered if she thought that Lord
Voldemort would stop because she asked politely.
“Step aside, woman!” said the shrill voice of burning cold. “For you I am
not come, only the boy.”
“Not Harry! Please... have mercy... have mercy...”
Lily Potter, Harry thought, seemed not to understand what type of people
became Dark Lords in the ﬁrst place; and if this was the best strategy she could
conceive to save her child’s life, that was her ﬁnal failure as a mother.
“I give you this rare chance to ﬂee,” said the shrill voice. “But I will not
trouble myself to subdue you, and your death here will not save your child.
Step aside, foolish woman, if you have any sense in you at all!”
“Not Harry, please no, take me, kill me instead!”
The empty thing that was Harry wondered if Lily Potter seriously imagined that Lord Voldemort would say yes, kill her, and then depart leaving
her son unharmed.
“Very well,” said the voice of death, now sounding coldly amused, “I
*

724 *

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

accept the bargain. Yourself to die, and the child to live. Now drop your
wand so that I can murder you.”
There was a hideous silence.
Lord Voldemort began to laugh, horrible contemptuous laughter.
And then, at last, Lily Potter’s voice shrieked in desperate hate, “Avada
ke—”
The lethal voice ﬁnished ﬁrst, the curse rapid and precise.
“Avadakedavra.”
A blinding ﬂare of green marked the end of Lily Potter.
And the boy in the crib saw it, the eyes, those two crimson eyes, seeming
to glow bright red, to blaze like miniature suns, ﬁlling Harry’s whole vision
as they locked to his own—

**
*
The other children saw Harry Potter fall, they heard Harry Potter
scream, a thin high-pitched scream that seemed to pierce their ears like
knives.
There was a brilliant silver ﬂash as the Headmaster bellowed “Expecto
Patronum!” and the blazing phoenix returned to being.
But Harry Potter’s horrible scream went on and on and on, even as
the Headmaster scooped up the boy in his arms and bore him away from
the Dementor, even as Neville Longbottom and Professor Flitwick both
went for the chocolate at the same time and—
Hermione knew it, she knew it as she saw it, she knew that her nightmare had been real, it was coming true, somehow it was coming true.
“Get him chocolate!” demanded the voice of Professor Quirrell,
pointlessly, because Professor Flitwick’s tiny form was already cannonballing toward where the Headmaster was racing toward the students.
Hermione was moving forward herself, though she didn’t know
what else she meant to do—
“Cast Patronuses!” shouted the Headmaster, as he brought Harry behind the Aurors. “Everyone who can! Get them between Harry and the
Dementor! It’s still feeding on him!”
There was a moment of frozen horror.
*

725 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

“Expecto Patronum!” shouted Professor Flitwick and Auror
Goryanof, and then Anthony Goldstein, but he failed the ﬁrst time,
and then Parvati Patil, who succeeded, and then Anthony tried again
and his silver bird spread its wings and screamed at the Dementor, and
Dean Thomas roared the words like they had been written in letters of
ﬁre and his wand gave birth to a towering white bear; there were eight
blazing Patronuses all in a line between Harry and the Dementor, and
Harry went on screaming and screaming as the Headmaster laid him on
the dried grass.
Hermione couldn’t cast a Patronus Charm, so she ran toward where
Harry lay. In her mind, something tried to guess how long it had been
already. Was it twenty seconds? More?
There was a dreadful agony and bewilderment on the face of Albus
Dumbledore. His long black wand was in his hand, but he spoke no
spells, only looked down at Harry’s convulsing body in horror—
Hermione didn’t know what to do, she didn’t know what to do, she
didn’t understand what was happening, and the most powerful wizard
in the world seemed equally at a loss.
“Use your phoenix!” bellowed Professor Quirrell. “Take him far away
from that Dementor!”
Without a single word the Headmaster scooped up Harry in his arms
and vanished in a crack of ﬁre along with the suddenly appearing Fawkes;
and the Headmaster’s Patronus winked out, where it had guarded the
Dementor.
Horror and confusion and sudden babble.
“Mr. Potter should recover,” Professor Quirrell said, raising his voice,
but his tone now calm once again, “I think it was just over twenty seconds.”
Then the blazing white phoenix appeared again, like it was ﬂying
before them from elsewhere, to Hermione Granger came the creature of
moonlight, and it cried to her in Albus Dumbledore’s voice:
“It still feeds on him, even here! How? If you know, Hermione Granger,
you must tell me! Tell me!”
The senior Auror turned to stare at her, and so did many students.
Professor Flitwick didn’t turn, he was now leveling his wand on Profes*

726 *

**
*

HUMANISM I

*
*

*

sor Quirrell, who was holding out clearly empty hands.
Seconds ticked past, uncounted.
She couldn’t remember it, she couldn’t remember the nightmare
clearly, she couldn’t remember why she had thought it was possible,
why she had been afraid—
Hermione realized then what she ought to do, and it was the hardest
decision of her life.
What if whatever had happened to Harry, happened to her too?
All her limbs cold as death, her vision gone dark, fear overwhelming
everything; she’d seen Harry dying, Mum and Dad dying, all her friends
dying, everyone dying, so that in the end, when she died, she would
be alone. That was her secret nightmare she’d never talked about with
anyone, that had given the Dementor its power over her, the loneliest
thing was to die alone.
She didn’t want to go to that place again, she, she didn’t, she didn’t
want to stay there forever—
You have courage enough for Gryﬃndor, said the calm voice of the
Sorting Hat in her memory, but you will do what is right in any House
I give you. You will learn, you will stand by your friends, in any House
you choose. So don’t be afraid, Hermione Granger, just decide where you
belong...
There was no time for deciding, Harry was dying.
“I can’t remember now,” said Hermione, her voice cracking, “but
just hold on, I’ll go in front of the Dementor again...”
She started to run toward the Dementor.
“Miss Granger!” squeaked Professor Flitwick, but he made no move
to stop her, only kept holding his wand on Professor Quirrell.
“Everyone!” shouted Auror Komodo in a voice of military command.
“Get your Patronuses out of her way!”
“Flitwick!” roared Professor Quirrell. “Summon Potter’s wand!”
Even as Hermione understood, Professor Flitwick was already crying “Accio!”, and she saw the stick of wood zooming up from where it
had lain almost touching the Dementor’s cage.

**
*
*

727 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-THREE

*
*

*

The eyes opened, dead and vacant.
“Harry!” gasped a voice in the colorless world. “Harry! Speak to me!”
The face of Albus Dumbledore leaned over into the ﬁeld of vision,
which had been occupied by a distant marble ceiling.
“You’re annoying,” said the empty voice. “You should die.”

*

728 *

CHAPTER

FORT Y-FOUR

HUMANISM, PART II
awkes,” said Albus Dumbledore, his voice cracking, “help him,
please—”
A brilliant creature of red-gold shuﬄed into the ﬁeld of vision, looking down quizzically; and it began to croon.
The meaningless chirps slid oﬀ the emptiness, there was nothing onto
which they could hold.
“You’re noisy,” said the voice, “you should die.”
“Chocolate,” Albus Dumbledore said, “you need chocolate, and your
friends—but I dare not take you back—”
Then a shining raven came, and spoke in Professor Flitwick’s voice;
whereupon Albus Dumbledore gasped in sudden comprehension, and
cursed aloud at his own stupidity.
The empty thing laughed at that, for it had retained the capacity to
be amused.
And a moment later they had all vanished in another ﬂash of ﬁre.

“F

**
*
It was only a moment, it seemed, between when Flitwick’s raven had
ﬂown to elsewhere, and when Albus Dumbledore reappeared in another
crack of red and golden ﬁre with Harry in his arms; but somehow in that
time Hermione had already managed to ﬁll her hands with chocolate.
Before Hermione even got there, chocolate had zoomed oﬀ the table
and straight into Harry’s mouth, which a tiny part of her mind said was
unfair, he’d gotten a chance to do it for her—
*

729 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

Harry spat the chocolate back out again.
“Go away,” said a voice so empty it wasn’t even cold.
...
Everything seemed to freeze, everyone who had been moving toward
Harry halted, all movements broken by the shock of those two dead
words.
Then: “No,” said Albus Dumbledore, “I will not,” and time resumed
again, even as another piece of chocolate zoomed oﬀ the table and into
Harry’s mouth.
Hermione was close enough now that she could see Harry’s expression become more hateful, as his mouth chewed with a mechanical, unnatural rhythm.
The Headmaster’s voice was grim as iron. “Filius, call Minerva, tell
her she must come at speed.”
Professor Flitwick whispered to his silver raven, and it ﬂew into the
air and vanished.
Another piece of chocolate ﬂoated into Harry’s mouth, and the mechanical chewing continued.
There were more students gathering around where the Headmaster
watched over Harry with grim eyes: Neville, Seamus, Dean, Lavender,
Ernie, Terry, Anthony, none of them daring to approach any closer than
Hermione had.
“What can we do?” said Dean in a trembling voice.
“Back oﬀ and give him more space—” said the dry voice of Professor
Quirrell.
“No!” interrupted the Headmaster. “Let him be surrounded by his
friends.”
Harry swallowed his chocolate, and said in that empty voice,
“They’re stupid. They should diemmmppphhh” as another piece of
chocolate entered his mouth.
Hermione saw the looks of shock that crossed their faces.
“He doesn’t mean it, does he?” Seamus said it like he was begging.
“You don’t understand,” Hermione said, her voice breaking, “that’s
not Harry—” and she shut up before she said anything more, but she had
to say that much.
*

730 *

**
*

HUMANISM II

*
*

*

She saw from the look on his face that Neville understood, and she
also saw that the others didn’t. If Harry had really never thought anything like that, then being exposed to a Dementor for less than a minute
wouldn’t have made him say it. That’s what they were probably thinking.
Less than a minute of Dementor exposure couldn’t create a whole
new evil person inside you out of nothing.
But if that person was already there—
Does the Headmaster know?
Hermione looked up at the Headmaster, and found that Albus Dumbledore was gazing at her, and that his blue eyes had grown suddenly
piercing—
Words came into her mind.
Do not speak of it, said the will of Dumbledore to her.
You know, thought Hermione. About his dark side.
I know. But this is beyond even that. Fawkes’s song cannot reach him,
where he is lost.
What can we—
I have a plan, sent the Headmaster. Patience.
Something about the tenor of that thought made Hermione nervous.
What sort of plan?
It is better that you not know, sent the Headmaster.
Now Hermione was getting really nervous. She didn’t know how
much the Headmaster knew about Harry’s dark side—
A fair point, sent the Headmaster. I am about to tell you; steel yourself
so as not to react. Are you ready? Good. I am going to pretend to cast the
Killing Curse on Professor McGonagall—Do not react, Hermione!
That took work. The Headmaster really was crazy! That wouldn’t
bring Harry out of his dark side, Harry would go completely berserk, he’d
kill the Headmaster—
But that is not true darkness, sent Albus Dumbledore. That is protectiveness, that is love. Fawkes will be able to reach him, then. And when
Harry sees that Minerva is alive after all, it will return him fully.
The thought came to Hermione—
I doubt that will work, sent the Headmaster, and you may not like the
*

731

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

way he reacts if you try. But you may try if you wish.
She hadn’t really meant that seriously! It was too—
Then her eyes moved, breaking gaze with the Headmaster, going to
the boy looking around with empty, despising eyes as his mouth kept
chewing and swallowing bar after bar of chocolate without eﬀect. Her
heart wrenched, and suddenly a lot of things didn’t seem to matter, only
that there was a chance.

**
*
There was a compulsion to chew and swallow chocolate. The response
to compulsion was killing.
People had gathered around and stared. That was annoying. The
response to annoyance was killing.
Other people were chattering in the background. That was insolent.
The response to insolence was to inﬂict pain, but since none of them
were useful, killing them would be simpler.
Killing all those people would be diﬃcult. But many of them didn’t
trust Quirrell, who was strong. Finding exactly the right trigger could
cause them all to kill each other.
Then a person leaned over into the ﬁeld of vision and did something completely strange, something that belonged to a foreign mode of
thought, for which there was only a single response stored anywhere—

**
*
She heard the gasps around her, and they didn’t matter, she maintained
the kiss on those chocolate-smeared lips as the tears welled in her eyes.
And Harry’s arms came up and pushed her away, and his lips yelled,
“I told you, no kissing!”

**
*
“I think he’ll be all right now,” the Headmaster said, looking at where
Harry was crying in great wretched sobs as Fawkes crooned over him.
*

732 *

**
*

HUMANISM II

*
*

*

“Excellently done, Miss Granger. Do you know, not even I would have
expected that to actually work?”
The phoenix’s song wasn’t meant for her, Hermione knew, but she
could still be soothed by it, which she needed, because her life was oﬃcially over.

*

733 *

CHAPTER

FORT Y-FI V E

HUMANISM, PART III
awkes’s song gently trailed oﬀ into nothing.
Harry sat up from where he had lain on the winter-blasted grass,
Fawkes still perched on his shoulder.
There were intakes of breath from all around him.
“Harry,” said Seamus in a wavering voice, “are you all right?”
The peace of the phoenix was still in him, and warmth, from where
Fawkes perched. Warmth, spreading out through him, and the memory of the song, still alive in the phoenix’s presence. There were terrible things that had happened to him, terrible thoughts that had passed
through him. He had regained an impossible memory, for all that the
Dementor had made him desecrate it. A strange word kept echoing in his
mind. And all of that could be put on hold for later, while the phoenix
still shone red and gold beneath the setting sun.
Fawkes cawed at him.
“Something I have to do?” Harry said to Fawkes. “What?”
Fawkes bobbed its head in the direction of the Dementor.
Harry looked at the unseeable horror still in its cage, then back at
the phoenix, puzzled.
“Mr. Potter?” said Minerva McGonagall’s voice from behind him.
“Are you all right?”
Harry climbed to his feet and turned.
Minerva McGonagall was looking at him, looking very worried; Albus Dumbledore beside her was studying him carefully; Filius Flitwick
appeared tremendously relieved; and all the students were just plain staring.

F

*

735 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

“I think so, Professor McGonagall,” Harry said calmly. He’d almost
said Minerva before managing to stop himself. While Fawkes was on his
shoulder, at least, Harry was ﬁne; it might be that he would collapse a
moment after Fawkes left, but somehow thoughts like that didn’t seem
important. “I think I’m okay.”
There ought to have been cheering, or sighs of relief, or something,
but no one seemed to know what to say, no one at all.
The peace of the phoenix lingered.
Harry turned back. “Hermione?” he said.
Everyone with the tiniest smidgin of romance in their hearts held
their breath.
“I don’t really know how to say thank you graciously,” Harry said
quietly, “any more than I know how to apologize. All I can say that if
you’re wondering whether it was the right thing to do, it was.”
The boy and the girl gazed into each other’s eyes.
“Sorry,” Harry said. “About what happens next. If there’s anything
I can do—”
“No,” Hermione said back. “There isn’t. It’s all right, though.” Then
she turned from Harry and walked away, toward the path that led back
to the gates of Hogwarts.
A number of girls gave Harry puzzled looks, and then followed her.
As they went, you could hear the excited questions starting.
Harry looked at them as they left, turned back to look at the other
students. They’d seen him on the ground, screaming, and...
Fawkes nuzzled his cheek, brieﬂy.
...and that would help them, someday, understanding that the BoyWho-Lived could also be hurt, could be wretched. So that when they
were hurt and wretched themselves, they would remember seeing Harry
writhing on the ground, and know that their own pain and troubles
didn’t mean they’d never amount to anything. Had the Headmaster
calculated that, when he had let the other students stay and watch?
Harry’s eyes went back to the tall tattered cloak, almost absentmindedly, and without really being aware of what he was speaking, Harry
said, “It shouldn’t ought to exist.”
“Ah,” said a dry, precise voice. “I thought you might say that. I
*

736 *

**
*

HUMANISM III

*
*

*

am very sorry to tell you, Mr. Potter, that Dementors cannot be killed.
Many have tried.”
“Really?” Harry said, still absentmindedly. “What did they try?”
“There is a certain extremely dangerous and destructive spell,” Professor Quirrell said, “which I will not name here; a spell of cursed ﬁre.
It is what you would use to destroy an ancient device such as the Sorting
Hat. It has no eﬀect on Dementors. They are undying.”
“They are not undying,” said the Headmaster. The words mild, the
gaze sharp. “They do not possess eternal life. They are wounds in the
world, and attacking a wound only makes it larger.”
“Hm,” Harry said. “Suppose you threw it into the Sun? Would it be
destroyed?”
“Throw it into the Sun?” squeaked Professor Flitwick, looking like
he wanted to faint.
“It seems unlikely, Mr. Potter,” Professor Quirrell said dryly. “The
Sun is very large, after all; I doubt the Dementor would have much eﬀect
on it. But it is not a test I would like to try, Mr. Potter, just in case.”
“I see,” Harry said.
Fawkes cawed a ﬁnal time, mantled his wings around Harry’s head,
and then launched himself from Harry. Launched himself straight toward the Dementor, screaming a great piercing cry of deﬁance that
echoed around the ﬁeld. And before anyone could react to that, there
was a ﬂash of ﬁre, and Fawkes was gone.
The peace faded, a little.
The warmth faded, a little.
Harry took in a deep breath, let it out again.
“Yep,” Harry said. “Still alive.”
Again that silence, again the absence of cheering; no one seemed to
know how to respond—
“It is good to know you are fully recovered, Mr. Potter,” Professor
Quirrell said ﬁrmly, as though to deny any other possibility. “Now, I
believe Miss Ransom was up next?”
That started a bit of an argument, in which Professor Quirrell was
right and everyone else was wrong. The Defense Professor pointed out
that, despite the understandable emotions of all concerned, the chance of
*

737 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

a similar mishap occurring to any other student verged on the inﬁnitesimal; the more so as they now knew to avoid mischances with wands.
And meanwhile, there were other students who needed to take their own
best chance at casting a corporeal Patronus Charm, or else learn the feeling of a Dementor so they could ﬂee, and discover their own degree of
vulnerability...
In the end it turned out that Dean Thomas and Ron Weasley of Gryfﬁndor were the only ones left who were still willing to go anywhere near
the Dementor, which simpliﬁed the argument.
Harry glanced in the Dementor’s direction. The word echoed in his
mind again.
All right, Harry thought to himself, if the Dementor is a riddle, what
is the answer?
And just like that, it was obvious.
Harry looked at the tarnished, slightly corroded cage.
He saw what lay beneath the tall, tattered cloak.
That was it, then.
Professor McGonagall came and spoke to Harry. She hadn’t seen the
worst of it, so there was only a slight glitter of water in her eyes. Harry
told her that he needed to talk to her afterward and ask a question he’d
put oﬀ for a while, but that didn’t need to happen right now, if she
was busy. There was a certain look about her which suggested that she
had been pulled away from something important; and Harry observed
this to her, and said that she honestly didn’t need to feel guilty about
leaving. This earned him something of a sharp look, but then leave she
did, hurriedly, with a promise that they would talk later.
Dean Thomas cast his white bear again, even in the Dementor’s presence; and Ron Weasley put up an adequate shield of sparkling mist.
Which concluded the day, so far as everyone else was concerned, and
Professor Flitwick began to herd the students back to Hogwarts. When
it was clear that Harry meant to stay behind, Professor Flitwick looked
at him quizzically; and Harry, for his part, glanced signiﬁcantly at Dumbledore. Harry didn’t know what Professor Flitwick made of that, but
after a sharp gaze of warning, his Head of House departed.
And so remained only Harry, Professor Quirrell, Headmaster Dum*

738 *

**
*

HUMANISM III

*
*

*

bledore, and an elite Auror trio.
It would have been better to get rid of the trio ﬁrst, but Harry
couldn’t think of a good way to do that.
“All right,” said Auror Komodo, “let’s take it back.”
“Excuse me,” Harry said. “I’d like to have another go at the
Dementor.”

**
*
Harry’s request met with a certain amount of opposition of the you’re
completely insane variety, though it was only Auror Butnaru who actually said that out loud.
“Fawkes told me to,” Harry said.
This did not overcome all the opposition, despite the look of shock
it produced on Dumbledore’s face. The argument went on, and it was
starting to wear the edges oﬀ the phoenix’s remaining peace, which annoyed Harry, though only a little.
“Look,” Harry said, “I’m pretty sure I know what I was doing wrong
before. There’s a kind of person who has to use a diﬀerent sort of warm
and happy thought. Just let me try it, okay?”
This did not prove persuasive either.
“I think,” Professor Quirrell said ﬁnally, staring at Harry with narrowed eyes, “that if we do not allow him to do this under supervision,
he may, at some point or another, sneak oﬀ and look for a Dementor
on his own. Do I accuse you falsely, Mr. Potter?”
There was an appalled pause at this. It seemed like a good time to
play his trump card.
“I don’t mind if the Headmaster keeps his own Patronus up,” Harry
said. For I will be in the presence of a Dementor just the same, Patronus or
no.
There was confusion at this, even Professor Quirrell looked puzzled;
but the Headmaster ﬁnally acceded, since it didn’t seem likely that Harry
could be hurt through four Patronuses.
If the Dementor could not reach through your Patronus on some level,
Albus Dumbledore, you would not see a naked man painful to look upon...
*

739 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

Harry didn’t say it out loud, for obvious reasons.
And they began to walk toward the Dementor.
“Headmaster,” Harry said, “suppose the Ravenclaw door asked you
this riddle: What lies at the center of a Dementor? What would you
say?”
“Fear,” said the Headmaster.
It was a simple enough mistake. The Dementor approached, and the
fear came over you. The fear hurt, you felt the fear weakening you, you
wanted the fear to go away.
It was natural to think the fear was the problem.
So they’d concluded that the Dementor was a creature of pure fear,
that there was nothing there to fear but fear itself, that the Dementor
couldn’t hurt you if you weren’t afraid...
But...
What lies at the center of a Dementor?
Fear.
What is so horrible that the mind refuses to see it?
Fear.
What is impossible to kill?
Fear.
...it didn’t quite ﬁt, once you thought about it.
Though it was clear enough why people would be reluctant to look
beyond the ﬁrst answer.
People understood fear.
People knew what they were supposed to do about fear.
So, faced with a Dementor, it wouldn’t exactly be comforting to ask:
‘What if the fear is just a side eﬀect rather than the main problem?’
They had come very close to the Dementor’s cage guarded by four
Patronuses, when there came sharp intakes of breath from the three Aurors and Professor Quirrell. Everyone’s faces turned to look at the Dementor, seeming to listen; there was horror on Auror Goryanof’s face.
Then Professor Quirrell raised his head, his face hard, and spat toward the Dementor.
“It did not like having its prey taken from it, I suppose,” Dumbledore
said quietly. “Well. If it becomes necessary, Quirinus, there will always
*

740 *

**
*

HUMANISM III

*
*

*

be a refuge for you at Hogwarts.”
“What did it say?” said Harry.
Every head swung to stare at him.
“You didn’t hear it...?” Dumbledore said.
Harry shook his head.
“It said to me,” said Professor Quirrell, “that it knew me, and that it
would hunt me down someday, wherever I tried to hide.” His face was
rigid, showing no fright.
“Ah,” Harry said. “I wouldn’t worry about that, Professor Quirrell.”
It’s not like Dementors can actually talk, or think; the structure they have is
borrowed from your own mind and expectations...
Now everyone was giving him very strange looks. The Aurors were
glancing nervously at each other, at the Dementor, at Harry.
And they stood directly before the Dementor’s cage.
“They are wounds in the world,” Harry said. “It’s just a wild guess,
but I’m guessing the one who said that was Godric Gryﬃndor.”
“Yes...” said Dumbledore. “How did you know?”
It is a common misconception, thought Harry, that all the best rationalists are Sorted into Ravenclaw, leaving none for other Houses. This is
not so; being Sorted into Ravenclaw indicates that your strongest virtue is
curiosity, wondering and desiring to know the true answer. And this is not
the only virtue a rationalist needs. Sometimes you have to work hard on a
problem, and stick to it for a while. Sometimes you need a clever plan for
ﬁnding out. And sometimes what you need more than anything else to see
an answer, is the courage to face it...
Harry’s gaze went to what lay beneath the cloak, the horror far worse
than any decaying mummy. Rowena Ravenclaw might also have known,
for it was an obvious enough riddle once you saw it as a riddle.
And it was also obvious why the Patronuses were animals. The animals didn’t know, and so were sheltered from the fear.
But Harry knew, and would always know, and would never be able to
forget. He’d tried to teach himself to face reality without ﬂinching, and
though Harry had not yet mastered that art, still those grooves had been
worn into his mind, the learned reﬂex to look toward the painful thought
instead of away. Harry would never be able to forget by thinking warm
*

741

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

happy thoughts about something else, and that was why the spell hadn’t
worked for him.
So Harry would think a warm happy thought that wasn’t about
something else.
Harry drew forth his wand that Professor Flitwick had returned to
him, put his feet into the beginning stance for the Patronus Charm.
Within his mind, Harry discarded the last remnants of the peace of
the phoenix, put aside the calm, the dreamlike state, remembered instead
Fawkes’s piercing cry, and roused himself for battle. Called upon all the
pieces and elements of himself to awaken. Raised up within himself all
the strength that the Patronus Charm could ever draw upon, to put himself into the right frame of mind for the ﬁnal warm and happy thought;
remembered all bright things.
The books his father had bought him.
Mum’s smile when Harry had handmade her a mother’s day card,
an elaborate thing that had used half a pound of spare electronics parts
from the garage to ﬂash lights and beep a little tune, and had taken him
three days to make.
Professor McGonagall telling him that his parents had died well, protecting him. As they had.
Realizing that Hermione was keeping up with him and even running
faster, that they could be true rivals and friends.
Coaxing Draco out of the darkness, watching him slowly move toward the light.
Neville and Seamus and Lavender and Dean and everyone else who
looked up to him, everyone that he would have fought to protect if anything threatened Hogwarts.
Everything that made life worth living.
His wand rose into the starting position for the Patronus Charm.
Harry thought of the stars, the image that had almost held oﬀ the
Dementor even without a Patronus. Only this time, Harry added the
missing ingredient, he’d never truly seen it but he’d seen the pictures and
the video. The Earth, blazing blue and white with reﬂected sunlight as
it hung in space, amid the black void and the brilliant points of light. It
belonged there, within that image, because it was what gave everything
*

742

*

**
*

HUMANISM III

*
*

*

else its meaning. The Earth was what made the stars signiﬁcant, made
them more than uncontrolled fusion reactions, because it was Earth that
would someday colonize the galaxy, and fulﬁll the promise of the night
sky.
Would they still be plagued by Dementors, the children’s children’s
children, the distant descendants of humankind as they strode from star
to star? No. Of course not. The Dementors were only little nuisances,
paling into nothingness in the light of that promise; not unkillable, not
invincible, not even close. You had to put up with little nuisances, if you
were one of the lucky and unlucky few to be born on Earth; on Ancient
Earth, as it would be remembered someday. That too was part of what it
meant to be alive, if you were one of the tiny handful of sentient beings
born into the beginning of all things, before intelligent life had come
fully into its power. That the much vaster future depended on what you
did here, now, in the earliest days of dawn, when there was still so much
darkness to be fought, and temporary nuisances like Dementors.
Mum and Dad, Hermione’s friendship and Draco’s journey, Neville
and Seamus and Lavender and Dean, the blue sky and brilliant Sun and
all bright things, the Earth, the stars, the promise, everything humanity
was and everything it would become...
On the wand, Harry’s ﬁngers moved into their starting positions; he
was ready, now, to think the right sort of warm and happy thought.
And Harry’s eyes stared directly at that which lay beneath the tattered cloak, looked straight at that which had been named Dementor.
The void, the emptiness, the hole in the universe, the absence of color
and space, the open drain through which warmth poured out of the
world.
The fear it exuded stole away all happy thoughts, its closeness drained
your power and strength, its kiss would destroy everything that you
were.
I know you now, Harry thought as his wand twitched once, twice,
thrice and four times, as his ﬁngers slid exactly the right distances, I
comprehend your nature, you symbolize Death, through some law of magic
you are a shadow that Death casts into the world.
And Death is not something I will ever embrace.
*

743

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

It is only a childish thing, that the human species has not yet outgrown.
And someday...
We’ll get over it...
And people won’t have to say goodbye any more...
The wand rose up and leveled straight at the Dementor.
“Expecto Patronum!”
The thought exploded from him like a breaking dam, surged down
his arm into his wand, burst from it as blazing white light. Light that
became corporeal, took on shape and substance.
A ﬁgure with two arms, two legs, and a head, standing upright; the
animal Homo sapiens, the shape of a human being.
And the shape glowed brighter and brighter as Harry poured all his
strength into his spell, blazing with incandescent light brighter than the
fading sunset, the Aurors and Professor Quirrell shielding their eyes in
shock.
And someday when the descendants of humanity have spread from star
to star, they won’t tell the children about the history of Ancient Earth until
they’re old enough to bear it; and when they learn they’ll weep to hear that
such a thing as Death had ever once existed!
The ﬁgure of a human shone more brilliant now than the noonday
Sun, so radiant that Harry could feel the warmth of it on his skin; and
Harry sent out all his deﬁance at the shadow of Death, opening all the
ﬂoodgates inside him to make that bright shape blaze even brighter and
yet brighter.
You are not invincible, and someday the human species will end you.
I will end you if I can, by the power of mind and magic and science.
I won’t cower in fear of Death, not while I have a chance of winning.
I won’t let Death touch me, I won’t let Death touch the ones I love.
And even if you do end me before I end you,
Another will take my place, and another,
Until the wound in the world is healed at last...
The bright ﬁgure of a human faded away as Harry lowered his wand.
The tattered cloak lay empty within the cage.
Harry breathed in deeply, and exhaled.
Like waking up from a dream, like opening his eyes after sleep, his
*

744 *

**
*

HUMANISM III

*
*

*

gaze moved away from the cage, he looked around and saw that everyone
was staring at him.
Albus Dumbledore was staring at him.
Professor Quirrell was staring at him.
The Auror trio was staring at him.
They were all looking at him like they’d just seen him destroy a Dementor.

*

745

*

CHAPTER

FORT Y-SIX

HUMANISM, PART I V
he last tip of the Sun was sinking below the horizon, the red light
fading from the treetops, only the blue sky illuminating the six
people standing upon the winter-dried and snow-spotted grass, near a
vacant cage.
Harry felt... well, normal again. Sane-ish. The spell hadn’t undone
the day and its damage, hadn’t made the injuries as if they had never
been, but his hurts had been... bandaged, meliorated? It was hard to
describe.
Dumbledore was also looking healthier, though not fully restored.
The old wizard’s head turned for a moment, locked eyes with Professor
Quirrell, then looked back to Harry. “Harry,” Dumbledore said, “are
you about to collapse in exhaustion and possibly die?”
“No, strangely enough,” Harry said. “That took something out of
me, but a lot less than I thought it would.” Or maybe it gave something
back, as well as taking... “Honestly, I expected my body to be hitting the
ground with a thud about now.”
There was a distinct body-hitting-the-ground-with-a-thuddish sort of
sound.
“Thank you for taking care of that, Quirinus,” said Dumbledore to
Professor Quirrell, who was now standing above and behind the unconscious forms of the three Aurors. “I confess I am still feeling a bit peaky.
Though I shall handle the Memory Charms myself.”
Professor Quirrell inclined his head, and then looked at Harry. “I
will omit a good deal of useless incredulity,” said Professor Quirrell, “remarks to the eﬀect that Merlin himself failed to do that, et cetera. Let us

T

*

747

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SIX

*
*

*

go straight to asking the important question. What the sweet slithering
snakes was that?”
“The Patronus Charm,” Harry said. “Version 2.0.”
“I rejoice to see that you are your usual self again,” said Dumbledore.
“But you are not going anywhere, young Ravenclaw, until you tell me
what exactly was that warm and happy thought.”
“Hm...” said Harry. He tapped a contemplative ﬁnger on his cheek.
“I wonder if I should?”
Professor Quirrell muﬄed a sudden grin.
“Please?” said the Headmaster.
Harry felt an impulse and decided to go with it. It was dangerous,
but there might not ever be a better opportunity until the end of time.
“Three sodas,” Harry said to his pouch, then looked up at the Defense Professor and the Headmaster of Hogwarts. “Gentlemen,” Harry
said, “I bought these sodas on my ﬁrst visit to Platform Nine and ThreeQuarters, on the day I entered into Hogwarts. I have been saving them
for special occasions; there is a minor enchantment on them to ensure
they are drunk at the right time. This is the last of my supply, but I do
not think there will ever come a ﬁner occasion. Shall we?”
Dumbledore took a soda can from Harry, and Harry tossed another to Professor Quirrell. The two older men each muttered identical
charms over the can and frowned brieﬂy at the result. Harry, for his
part, simply popped the top and drank.
The Defense Professor and the Headmaster of Hogwarts politely followed suit.
Harry said, “I thought of my absolute rejection of death as the natural
order.”
It might not be the right kind of warm feeling you needed to cast a
Patronus Charm, but it was going into Harry’s Top 10 nonetheless.
The looks he got from the Defense Professor and the Headmaster
brieﬂy made Harry nervous, as the spilled Comed-Tea faded out of existence; but then the two of them each glanced at the other and both apparently decided that they couldn’t get away with doing anything really
awful to Harry in the other’s presence, just as Harry had been counting
on.
*

748 *

**
*

HUMANISM I V

*
*

*

“Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell, “even I know that is not how
things are supposed to work.”
“Indeed,” said Dumbledore. “Explain.”
Harry opened his mouth, and then, as realization hit him, rapidly
snapped his mouth shut again. Godric hadn’t told anyone, nor had
Rowena if she’d known; there might have been any number of wizards
who’d ﬁgured it out and kept their mouths shut. You couldn’t forget if
you knew that was what you were trying to do; once you realized how it
worked, the animal form of the Patronus Charm would never work for
you again—and most wizards didn’t have the right upbringing to turn
on Dementors and destroy them—
“Erm, sorry about this,” said Harry. “But I’ve just this instant realized that explaining would be an incredibly bad idea until you work
some things out on your own.”
“Is that the truth, Harry?” Dumbledore said slowly. “Or are you just
pretending to be wise—”
“Headmaster!” said Professor Quirrell, sounding genuinely shocked.
“Mr. Potter has told you that this spell is not spoken of with those who
cannot cast it! You do not press a wizard on such matters!”
“If I told you—” Harry began.
“No,” Professor Quirrell said, sounding rather severe. “You don’t
tell us why, Mr. Potter, you simply tell us that we are not to know. If
you wish to devise a hint, you do so carefully, at leisure, not in the midst
of conversation.”
Harry nodded.
“But,” said the Headmaster. “But, but what am I to tell the Ministry?
You can’t just lose a Dementor!”
“Tell them I ate it,” said Professor Quirrell, causing Harry to choke
on the soda he had unthinkingly raised to his lips. “I don’t mind. Shall
we head on back, Mr. Potter?”
The two of them began to walk the dirt path back to Hogwarts,
leaving behind Albus Dumbledore staring forlornly at the empty cage
and the three sleeping Aurors awaiting their Memory Charms.

*

749 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SIX

*
*

*

Aftermath, Harry Potter and Professor Quirrell:
They walked for a while before Professor Quirrell spoke, and all
background noise dropped into silence when he did.
“You are exceptionally good at killing things, my student,” said Professor Quirrell.
“Thank you,” Harry said sincerely.
“I am not prying,” said Professor Quirrell, “but on the oﬀ-chance
that it was only the Headmaster who you did not trust with the secret...?”
Harry considered this. Professor Quirrell already couldn’t cast the
animal Patronus Charm.
But you couldn’t untell a secret, and Harry was a fast enough learner
to realize that he ought to at least think for a while before unleashing
this one upon the world.
Harry shook his head.
Professor Quirrell nodded acceptance.
“Out of curiosity, Professor Quirrell,” said Harry, “if your bringing
the Dementor to Hogwarts had been part of an evil plot, what would
have been its goal?”
“Assassinate Dumbledore while he was weakened,” Professor Quirrell said without even hesitating. “Hm. The Headmaster told you he
was suspicious of me?”
Harry said nothing for a second while he tried to think of a reply,
and then gave up when he realized he’d already answered.
“Interesting...” Professor Quirrell said. “Mr. Potter, it is not out of
the question that there was a plot at work today. Your wand ending up
that close to the Dementor’s cage could have been an accident. Or one
of the Aurors could have been Imperiused, Confunded, or Legilimized
to exert an inﬂuence. Flitwick and myself should not be excluded as suspects, in your calculation. One notes that Professor Snape canceled all
his classes today, and I suspect he is powerful enough to Disillusion himself; the Aurors cast detection charms early on, but they did not repeat
them immediately before your turn. But most easily of all, Mr. Potter, the deed could have been plotted by Dumbledore himself; and if
he did, why, he might also take steps in advance to cast your suspicion
*

750 *

**
*

HUMANISM I V

*
*

*

elsewhere.”
They walked on for a few steps.
“But why would he?” Harry said.
The Defense Professor stayed quiet a moment, and then said,
“Mr. Potter, what steps have you taken to investigate the Headmaster’s
character?”
“Not many,” said Harry. “Not enough.”
“Then I will observe,” said Professor Quirrell, “that you do not ﬁnd
out all there is to know about a man by asking only his friends.”
Now it was Harry’s turn to walk a few steps in silence on the slightly
beaten dirt path that led back to Hogwarts. He’d really been supposed to
know better than that already. Conﬁrmation bias was the technical term;
it meant, among other things, that when you chose your information
sources, there was a notable tendency to choose information sources that
agreed with your current opinions.
“Thank you,” Harry said. “Actually... I didn’t say it earlier, did I?
Thank you for everything. If another Dementor ever threatens you, or
for that matter, slightly annoys you, just let me know and I’ll introduce it
to Mister Glowy Person. I don’t like it when Dementors slightly annoy
my friends.”
That got him an indecipherable glance from Professor Quirrell.
“You destroyed the Dementor because it threatened me?”
“Erm,” Harry said, “I’d sort of decided on it before then, but yes,
that would have been suﬃcient reason by itself.”
“I see,” said Professor Quirrell. “And what would you have done
about the threat to me if your spell hadn’t worked for destroying the
Dementor?”
“Plan B,” said Harry. “Encase the Dementor in dense metal with a
high melting point, probably tungsten, drop it into an active volcano,
and hope it ends up inside Earth’s mantle. Ah, the whole planet is ﬁlled
with molten lava under its surface—”
“Yes,” said Professor Quirrell. “I know.” The Defense Professor was
wearing a very odd smile. “I really should have thought of that myself, all
things considered. Tell me, Mr. Potter, if you wanted to lose something
where no one would ever ﬁnd it again, where would you put it?”
*

751

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SIX

*
*

*

Harry considered this question. “I suppose I shouldn’t ask what
you’ve found that needs losing—”
“Quite,” said Professor Quirrell, as Harry had expected; and then,
“Perhaps you will be told when you are older,” which Harry hadn’t.
“Well,” said Harry, “besides trying to get it into the molten core of
the planet, you could bury it in solid rock a kilometer underground
in a randomly selected location—maybe teleport it in, if there’s some
way to do that blindly, or drill a hole and repair the hole afterward; the
important thing would be not to leave any traces leading there, so it’s
just an anonymous cubic meter somewhere in the Earth’s crust. You
could drop it into the Mariana Trench, that’s the deepest depth of ocean
on the planet—or just pick some random other ocean trench, to make it
less obvious. If you could make it bouyant and invisible, then you could
throw it into the stratosphere. Or ideally you would launch it into space,
with a cloak against detection, and a randomly ﬂuctuating acceleration
factor that would take it out of the Solar System. And afterward, of
course, you’d Obliviate yourself, so even you didn’t know exactly where
it was.”
The Defense Professor was laughing, and it sounded even odder than
his smile.
“Professor Quirrell?” Harry said.
“All excellent suggestions,” said Professor Quirrell. “But tell me,
Mr. Potter, why those exact ﬁve?”
“Huh?” said Harry. “They just seemed like the obvious sorts of
ideas.”
“Oh?” said Professor Quirrell. “But there is an interesting pattern
to them, you see. One might say it sounds like something of a riddle. I
must admit, Mr. Potter, that although it has had its ups and downs, on
the whole, this has been a surprisingly good day.”
And they continued walking down the path that led to the gates of
Hogwarts, quite some distance apart; as Harry, without even thinking
about it, automatically stayed far enough away from the Defense Professor not to trigger that sense of doom, which for some reason seemed
unusually strong right now.

*

752 *

**
*

HUMANISM I V

*
*

*

Aftermath, Daphne Greengrass:
Hermione had refused to answer any questions, and as soon as they’d
passed the split leading to the Slytherin dungeons, Daphne and Tracey
had peeled oﬀ at once, walking as quickly as they could. Rumor traveled
fast in Hogwarts, so they’d have to go to the dungeons right away if they
wanted to be the ﬁrst to tell everyone the story.
“Now remember,” said Daphne, “don’t just blurt out about the kiss
as soon as we walk in, okay? It works better if we tell the whole story
in order.”
Tracey nodded excitedly.
And as soon as they burst into the Slytherin common room, Tracey
Davis took a deep breath and shouted, “Everyone! Harry Potter couldn’t
cast the Patronus Charm and the Dementor almost ate him and Professor
Quirrell saved him but then Potter was all evil until Granger brought him
back with a kiss! It’s true love for sure!”
It was ordered storytelling of a sort, Daphne supposed.
The news failed to produce the expected reaction. Most of the girls
glanced over and then stayed in their couches, or the boys simply kept
reading in their chairs.
“Yes,” said Pansy sourly, from where she was sitting with Gregory’s
feet in her lap, leaning back and reading what seemed to be a coloring
book, “Millicent already told us.”
How—
“Why didn’t you kiss him ﬁrst, Tracey?” said Flora and Hestia Carrow from their own chairs. “Now Potter’s going to marry a mudblood
girl! You could’ve been his true love and gotten into a rich Noble House
and everything if you’d just kissed him ﬁrst!”
Tracey’s face was a picture in stunned realization.
“What?” shrieked Daphne. “Love does not work like that!”
“Of course it does,” stated Millicent from where she was practicing
some sort of Charm while looking out a window at the swirling waters
of the Hogwarts Lake. “First kiss gets the prince.”
“It wasn’t their ﬁrst kiss!” shouted Daphne. “Hermione was already
his true love! That’s why she could bring him back!” Then Daphne real*

753 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SIX

*
*

*

ized what she’d just said and winced internally, but as the saying went,
you had to ﬁt the tongue to the ear.
“Whoa, whoa, whoa, what?” said Gregory, swinging his feet oﬀ
Pansy’s lap. “What’s this? Miss Bulstrode didn’t tell that part.”
Everyone else was also looking at Daphne, now.
“Oh, yeah,” said Daphne, “Harry shoved her away and shouted,
‘I told you, no kissing!’ Then Harry screamed like he was dying and
Fawkes started singing to him—I’m not sure which one of those happened ﬁrst, actually—”
“That doesn’t sound like true love to me,” said the Carrow twins.
“That sounds like the wrong person kissed him.”
“It was supposed to be me,” whispered Tracey. Her face was still
stunned. “I was supposed to be his true love. Harry Potter was my
general. I should’ve, I should’ve fought Granger for him—”
Daphne spun on Tracey, incensed. “You? Take Harry away from
Hermione?”
“Yeah!” said Tracey. “Me!”
“You’re nuts,” Daphne stated with conviction. “Even if you had
kissed him ﬁrst, you know what that would make you? The sad little
lovestruck girl who dies in the hero’s arms at the end of Act Two.”
“You take that back!” shouted Tracey.
Meanwhile, Gregory had crossed the room to where Vincent was
doing his homework. “Mr. Crabbe,” Gregory said in a low voice, “I
think Mr. Malfoy needs to know about this.”

Aftermath, Hermione Granger:
Hermione stared at the wax-sealed paper, on the surface of which
was inscribed simply the number 42.
I ﬁgured out why we couldn’t cast the Patronus Charm, Hermione, it
doesn’t have anything to do with us not being happy enough. But I can’t tell
you. I couldn’t even tell the Headmaster. It needs to be even more secret
than partial Transﬁguration, for now, anyway. But if you ever need to ﬁght
Dementors, the secret is written here, cryptically, so that if someone doesn’t
*

754 *

**
*

HUMANISM I V

*
*

*

know it’s about Dementors and the Patronus Charm, they won’t know what
it means...
She’d told Harry about seeing him dying, her parents dying, all her
friends dying, everyone dying. She hadn’t told him about her terror of
dying alone, somehow that was still too painful.
Harry had told her about remembering his parents dying, and that
he’d thought it was funny.
There’s no light in the place the Dementor takes you, Hermione. No
warmth. No caring. It’s somewhere that you can’t even understand happiness. There’s pain, and fear, and those can still drive you. You can hate,
and take pleasure in destroying what you hate. You can laugh, when you see
other people hurting. But you can’t ever be happy, you can’t even remember
what it is that isn’t there anymore... I don’t think there’s any way I can ever
explain just what you saved me from. I’m usually ashamed to put people to
trouble, I usually can’t stand it when people make sacriﬁces for me, but this
one time I’ll say that no matter what it ends up costing you to have kissed
me, don’t ever doubt for a second that it was the right thing to do.
Hermione hadn’t realized just how little the Dementor had touched
her, how small and shallow had been the darkness into which it had
taken her.
She’d seen everyone dying, and that had still been able to hurt.
Hermione put the paper back into her pouch, like a good girl ought
to.
She’d really wanted to read it, though.
She was frightened of Dementors.
Aftermath, Minerva McGonagall:
She felt frozen; she shouldn’t have been so shocked, she shouldn’t
have found Harry so hard to face, but after what he’d been through...
She had searched the young boy in front of her for any signs of Dementation, and failed to ﬁnd them. But something about the calm with
which he had asked such a foreboding question seemed deeply worrying.
“Mr. Potter, I can’t possibly speak of such matters without the Headmaster’s permission!”
*

755 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SIX

*
*

*

The boy in her oﬃce took this in without changing expression. “I
would prefer not to disturb the Headmaster over this matter,” Harry
said calmly. “I insist on not disturbing him, in fact, and you did promise
that our conversation would be kept private. So let me put it this way.
I know that there was, in fact, a prophecy. I know that you are the
one who originally heard it from Professor Trelawney. I know that the
prophecy identiﬁed the child of James and Lily as someone dangerous
to the Dark Lord. And I know who I am, indeed everyone now knows
who I am, so you are revealing nothing new or dangerous, if you tell me
only this: What was the exact wording which identiﬁed me, the child of
James and Lily?”
Trelawney’s hollow voice echoed in her mind—
Born to those who have thrice defied him,
Born as the seventh month dies...
“Harry,” said Professor McGonagall, “I can’t possibly tell you that
without permission!” It chilled her to the bone that Harry knew so much
already, she couldn’t imagine how Harry had learned—
The boy looked at her with strange, sorrowful eyes. “Can you not
sneeze without the Headmaster’s permission, Professor McGonagall?
For I do promise to you that I have good reason to ask, and good reason
to keep the question private.”
“Please don’t, Harry,” she whispered.
“All right,” Harry said. “One simple question. Please. Was the Potter family mentioned by name? Does the prophecy literally say ‘Potter’?”
She stared at Harry for a while. She couldn’t have said why or where
she got the sense that this was a critical point, that she could not lightly
refuse the request, nor lightly accede to it—
“No,” she ﬁnally said. “Please, Harry, don’t ask any more.”
The boy smiled, a little sadly it seemed, and said, “Thank you, Minerva. You are a good woman and true.”
And while her mouth was still open in utter shock, Harry Potter got
up and left the oﬃce; and only then did she realize that Harry had taken
her refusal as an answer, and the true answer at that—
*

756 *

**
*

HUMANISM I V

*
*

*

Harry closed the door behind himself.
The logic had presented itself with a strange diamondlike clarity.
Harry couldn’t have said if it had come to him during Fawkes’s singing,
or maybe even before.
Lord Voldemort had killed James Potter. He had preferred to spare
Lily Potter’s life. He had continued his attack, therefore, with the sole
purpose of killing their infant child.
Dark Lords were not usually scared of infant children.
So there was a prophecy about Harry Potter being dangerous to Lord
Voldemort, and Lord Voldemort had known that prophecy.
“I give you this rare chance to ﬂee. But I will not trouble myself to subdue
you, and your death here will not save your child. Step aside, foolish woman,
if you have any sense in you at all!”
Had it been a whim, to give her that chance? But then Lord Voldemort would not have tried to persuade her. Had the prophecy warned
Lord Voldemort against killing Lily Potter? Then Lord Voldemort
would have troubled himself to subdue her. Lord Voldemort had been
mildly inclined not to kill Lily Potter. The preference had been stronger
than a whim, but not as strong as a warning.
So suppose that someone whom Lord Voldemort considered a lesser
ally or servant, useful but not indispensable, had begged the Dark Lord
to spare Lily’s life. Lily’s, but not James’s.
This person had known that Lord Voldemort would attack the house
of the Potters. Had known both the prophecy, and the fact that the Dark
Lord knew it. Otherwise he would not have begged Lily’s life.
According to Professor McGonagall, besides herself, the other two
who knew of the prophecy were Albus Dumbledore and Severus Snape.
Severus Snape, who had loved Lily before she was Lily Potter, and
hated James.
Severus, then, had learned of the prophecy, and told it to the Dark
Lord. Which he had done because the prophecy had not described the
Potters by name. It had been a riddle, and Severus had solved that riddle
only too late.
But if Severus had been the ﬁrst to hear the prophecy, and disposed to
tell it to the Dark Lord, then why would he also have told Dumbledore
*

757 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SIX

*
*

*

or Professor McGonagall?
Therefore Dumblefore or Professor McGonagall had heard it ﬁrst.
The Headmaster of Hogwarts had no obvious reason to tell the
Transﬁguration Professor about an extremely sensitive and crucial
prophecy. But the Transﬁguration Professor had every reason to tell
the Headmaster.
It seemed likely, then, that Professor McGonagall had been the ﬁrst
to hear it.
The prior probabilities said that it had been Professor Trelawney,
Hogwarts’s resident seer. Seers were rare, so if you counted up most of
the seconds Professor McGonagall had spent in the presence of a seer
over the course of her lifetime, most of those seer-seconds would be
Trelawney-seconds.
Professor McGonagall had told Dumbledore, and would have told
no one else about the prophecy without permission.
Therefore, it was Albus Dumbledore who had arranged for Severus
Snape to somehow learn of the prophecy. And Dumbledore himself had
solved the riddle successfully, or he would not have selected Severus, who
had once loved Lily, as the intermediary.
Dumbledore had deliberately arranged for Lord Voldemort to hear
about the prophecy, in hopes of luring him to his death. Perhaps Dumbledore had arranged for Severus to learn only some of the prophecy, or
there were other prophecies of which Severus had remained innocent...
somehow Dumbledore had known that an immediate attack on the Potters would still lead to Lord Voldemort’s immediate defeat, although
Lord Voldemort himself had not believed this. Or maybe that had just
been a lucky stroke of Dumbledore’s insanity, his taste for bizarre plots...
Severus had ended up serving Dumbledore afterward; perhaps the
Death Eaters would not look kindly on Severus if Dumbledore revealed
his role in their defeat.
Dumbledore had tried to arrange for Harry’s mother to be spared.
But that part of his plot had failed. And he had knowingly condemned
James Potter to his death.
Dumbledore was responsible for the deaths of Harry’s parents. If
the whole chain of logic was correct. Harry could not, in justice, say
*

758 *

**
*

HUMANISM I V

*
*

*

that successfully ending the Wizarding War did not count as extenuating
circumstances. But somehow this still... bothered him a great deal.
And it was time and past time to ask Draco Malfoy what the other
side of that war had to say about the character of Albus Percival Wulfric
Brian Dumbledore.

*

759 *

CHAPTER

FORT Y-SE V EN

PERSONHOOD THEORY
here comes a point in every plot where the victim starts to suspect; and looks back, and sees a trail of events all pointing in a
single direction. And when that point comes, Father had explained, the
prospect of the loss may seem so unbearable, and admitting themselves
tricked may seem so humiliating, that the victim will yet deny the plot,
and the game may continue long after.
Father had warned Draco not to do that again.
First, though, he’d let Mr. Avery ﬁnish eating all of the cookies he’d
swindled from Draco, while Draco watched and cried. The whole lovely
jar of cookies that Father had given him just a few hours earlier, for
Draco had lost all of them to Mr. Avery, down to the very last one.
So it was a familiar feeling that Draco had felt in the pit of his stomach, when Gregory told him about The Kiss.
Sometimes you looked back, and saw things...
(In a lightless classroom—you couldn’t quite call it unused any more,
since it’d seen weekly use over the last few months—a boy sat enshrouded
in a hooded cowl, with an unlighted crystal globe on the desk in front of
him. Thinking in silence, thinking in darkness, waiting for an opening
door to let in the light.)
Harry had shoved Granger away and said, I told you, no kissing!
Harry would probably say something like, She just did it to annoy me,
last time, just like she made me go on that date.
But the veriﬁed story was that Granger had been willing to face the
Dementor again in order to help Harry; that she had kissed Harry, crying, when he was lost in the depths of Dementation; and that her kiss
had brought him back.

T

*

761

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

That didn’t sound like rivalry, even friendly rivalry.
That sounded like the kind of friendship you usually didn’t see even
in plays.
Then why had Harry made his friend climb the icy walls of Hogwarts?
Because that was the sort of thing Harry Potter did to his friends?
Father had told Draco that to fathom a strange plot, one technique
was to look at what ended up happening, assume it was the intended
result, and ask who beneﬁted.
What had ended up happening as the result of Draco and Granger
ﬁghting Harry Potter together... was that Draco had started to feel a lot
friendlier toward Granger.
Who beneﬁted from the scion of Malfoy becoming friends with a
mudblood witch?
Who beneﬁted, that was famous for exactly that sort of plot?
Who beneﬁted, that could possibly be pulling Harry Potter’s strings?
Dumbledore.
And if that was true then Draco would have to go to Father and tell
him everything, no matter what happened after that, Draco couldn’t
imagine what would happen after that, it was awful beyond imagining.
Which made him want to cling desperately to the last shred of hope that
it wasn’t all what it looked like...
...Draco remembered that, too, from Mr. Avery’s lesson.
Draco hadn’t planned to confront Harry yet. He was still trying to
think of an experimental test, something that Harry wouldn’t just see
through and fake. But then Vincent had come with the message that
Harry wanted to meet early this week, on Friday instead of Saturday.
And so here Draco was, in a dark classroom, an unlit crystal globe
on his desk, waiting.
Minutes passed.
Footsteps approached.
The door made a gentle creak as it swung open into the classroom,
revealing Harry Potter dressed in his own hood and cowl; Harry stepped
forward into the dark classroom, and the sturdy door closed behind him
with a faint click.
*

762 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

Draco tapped the crystal globe, and the classroom lit with bright
green light. Green light projected shadows of the desks onto the ﬂoor,
and glared back at him from the curved chair-backs, photons bouncing
oﬀ the wood in such fashion that the angle of incidence equaled the angle
of reﬂection.
At least that much of what he’d learned wasn’t likely to be a lie.
Harry had ﬂinched as the light went on, halting for a moment, then
resumed his approach. “Hello, Draco,” Harry said quietly, drawing back
his hood as he came to Draco’s desk. “Thank you for coming, I know
it’s not our usual time—”
“You’re welcome,” Draco said ﬂatly.
Harry dragged one of the chairs to face Draco across his desk, the
legs making a slight screeching sound on the ﬂoor. He spun the chair
so that it was facing the wrong way, and sat down straddling it, his arms
folded across the back of the chair. The boy’s face was pensive, frowning,
serious, looking very adult even for Harry Potter.
“I have an important question to ask you,” said Harry, “but there’s
something else I want us to do before that.”
Draco said nothing, feeling a certain weariness. Part of him just
wanted it all to be over with already.
“Tell me, Draco,” said Harry. “Why don’t Muggles ever leave ghosts
behind when they die?”
“Because Muggles don’t have souls, obviously,” Draco said. He
didn’t even realize until after he’d said it that it might contradict Harry’s
politics, and then he didn’t care. Besides, it was obvious.
Harry’s face showed no surprise. “Before I ask my important question, I want to see if you can learn the Patronus Charm.”
For a moment the sheer nonsequitur stumped Draco. Good old
impossible-to-predict-or-understand Harry Potter. There were times
when Draco wondered whether Harry was deliberately this disorienting as a tactic.
Then Draco understood, and shoved himself up and away from his
desk in a single angry motion. That was it. It was over. “Like Dumbledore’s servants,” he spat.
“Like Salazar Slytherin,” Harry said steadily.
*

763 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

Draco almost stumbled over his own feet in the middle of his ﬁrst
stride toward the door.
Slowly, Draco turned back toward Harry.
“I don’t know where you came up with that,” said Draco, “but it’s
wrong, everyone knows the Patronus Charm is a Gryﬃndor spell—”
“Salazar Slytherin could cast a corporeal Patronus Charm,” Harry
said. Harry’s hand darted into his robes, brought out a book whose title
was written as white on green, and so almost impossible to read in the
green light; but it looked old. “I discovered that when I was researching the Patronus Charm before. And I found the original reference and
checked the book out of the library just in case you didn’t believe me.
The author of this book doesn’t think there’s anything unusual about
Salazar being able to cast a Patronus, either; the belief that Slytherins
can’t do that must be recent. And as a further historical note, though I
don’t have the book with me, Godric Gryﬃndor never could.”
After the ﬁrst six times Draco had tried calling Harry’s bluﬀ, on
six successively more ridiculous occasions, he’d realized that Harry just
didn’t lie about what was written in books. Still, when Harry’s hands
opened the book and lay it out to the place of a bookmark, Draco leaned
over and studied the place where Harry’s ﬁnger pointed.
Then the ﬁres of Ravenclaw fell upon the darkness that had cloaked the
left wing of Lord Foul’s army, breaking it, and it was revealed that the Lord
Gryﬃndor had spoken true; the fear they all had felt was not natural in its
source, but coming from thrice a dozen Dementors, who had been promised
the souls of the defeated. At once the Lady Huﬄepuﬀ and Lord Slytherin
brought forth their Patronuses, a vast angry badger and a bright silver serpent, and the defenders lifted their heads as the shadow passed from their
hearts. And Lady Ravenclaw laughed, remarking that Lord Foul was a great
fool, for now his own army would be subject to the fear, but not the defenders
of Hogwarts. Yet the Lord Salazar said, “No fool he, that much I know.” And
the Lord Gryﬃndor beside him studied the battleﬁeld with a frown upon his
face...
Draco looked back up. “So?”
Harry closed the book and put it into his pouch. “Chaos and Sunshine both have soldiers that can cast corporeal Patronus Charms. Cor*

764 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

poreal Patronuses can be used to convey messages. If you can’t learn the
spell, Dragon Army will be at a severe military disadvantage—”
Draco didn’t care about that right now, and told Harry so. His voice
was sharper than it probably should have been.
Harry didn’t blink. “Then I’m calling in the favor you owe me from
that time I stopped a riot from breaking out, on our ﬁrst day of broomstick lessons. I’m going to try to teach you the Patronus Charm, and for
my favor, I want you to do your honest best to learn and cast it. I trust
to the honor of House Malfoy that you will.”
Draco felt that certain weariness again. If Harry had asked at any
other time, it would have been a fair return on favor owed, given that it
wasn’t actually a Gryﬃndor spell. But...
“Why?” Draco said.
“To ﬁnd out whether you can do this thing that Salazar Slytherin
could do,” Harry said evenly. “This is an experimental test, and I will
not tell you what it means until after you have done it. Will you?”
...It probably was a good idea to discharge that favor on something
innocuous, all the more so if it was time to break with Harry Potter.
“All right.”
Harry drew a wand from his robes, and laid it against the globe.
“Not really the best color for learning the Patronus Charm,” Harry said.
“Green light the exact shade of the Killing Curse, I mean. But silver is
a Slytherin color too, isn’t it? Dulak.” The light went out, and Harry
whispered the ﬁrst two phrases of the Continual Light enchantment, recasting that part of it, though neither of them could have cast the whole
thing by themselves. Then Harry tapped the globe again, and the room
lit with a silver radiance, brilliant but still soft and gentle. Color returned to the desks and chairs, and to Harry’s slightly sweaty face beneath his shock of black hair.
It took that long for Draco to realize the implication. “You saw a
Killing Curse cast since the last time we met? When—how—”
“Cast the Patronus Charm,” Harry said, looking more serious than
ever, “and I’ll tell you.”
Draco pressed his hands to his eyes, shutting out the silver light.
“You know, I really should remember that you’re too weird for any nor*

765 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

mal plots!”
Within his self-imposed darkness, he heard the sound of Harry
snickering.

**
*
Harry watched closely as Draco ﬁnished his latest run-through of the
preliminary gestures, the part of the spell that was diﬃcult to learn; the
ﬁnal brandish and the pronunciation didn’t have to be precise. All three
of the last runs had been perfect as far as Harry could see. Harry had
also felt an odd impulse to adjust things that Mr. Lupin hadn’t said anything about, like the angle of Draco’s elbow or the direction his foot was
pointing; it could have been entirely his own imagination, and probably
was, but Harry had decided to go with it just in case.
“All right,” Harry said quietly. There was a tension in his chest that
made it a little hard to speak. “Now we don’t have a Dementor here, but
that’s all right. We won’t need one. Draco, when your father spoke to
me at the train station, he said that you were the one thing in the world
that was most precious to him, and he threatened to throw away all his
other plans to take vengeance on me, if ever you came to harm.”
“He... what?” There was a catch in Draco’s voice, and a strange look
on his face. “Why are you telling me that?”
“Why wouldn’t I?” Harry didn’t let his expression change, though
he could guess what Draco was thinking; that Harry had been plotting
to separate Draco from his father, and shouldn’t be saying anything that
would bring them closer together. “There’s always been just one person
who matters most to you, and I know exactly what warm and happy
thought will let you cast the Patronus Charm. You told it to me at the
train station before the ﬁrst day of school. Once you fell oﬀ a broomstick
and broke your ribs. It hurt more than anything you’d ever felt, and you
thought you were going to die. Pretend that fear is coming from a Dementor, standing in front of you, wearing a tattered black cloak, looking
like a dead thing left in water. And then cast the Patronus Charm, and
when you brandish the wand to drive the Dementor away, think of how
your father held your hand, so that you wouldn’t be afraid; and then
*

766 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

think of how much he loves you, and how much you love him, and put
it all into your voice when you say Expecto Patronum. For the honor
of House Malfoy, and not just because you promised me a favor. Show
me you didn’t lie to me that day in the train station when you told me
Lucius was a good father. Show me you can do what Salazar Slytherin
could do.”
And Harry stepped backward, behind Draco, out of Draco’s ﬁeld of
vision, so that Draco only faced the dusty old teacher’s desk and blackboard at the front of the unused classroom.
Draco cast one look behind him, that strange look still on his face,
and then turned away to face forward. Harry saw the exhalation, the
inhalation. The wand twitched once, twice, thrice, and four times.
Draco’s ﬁngers slid along the wand, exactly the right distances—
Draco lowered his wand.
“This is too—” Draco said, “I can’t think this right, while you’re
watching—”
Harry turned around and started walking toward the door. “I’ll
come back in a minute,” Harry said. “Just hold to your happy thought,
and the Patronus will stay.”

**
*
From behind Draco came the sound of the door opening again.
Draco heard Harry’s footsteps entering the classroom, but Draco
didn’t turn to look.
Harry didn’t say anything either. The silence stretched.
Finally—
“What does this mean?” Draco said. His voice wavered a bit.
“It means you love your father,” Harry’s voice said. Which was just
what Draco had been thinking, and trying not to cry in front of Harry.
It was too right, just too right—
Before Draco, on the ﬂoor, was the shining form of a snake that
Draco recognized; a Blue Krait, a snake ﬁrst brought to their manor by
Lord Abraxas Malfoy after a visit to some faraway land, and Father had
kept a Blue Krait in the ophidiarium ever since. The thing about the Blue
*

767 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

Krait was that the bite wouldn’t hurt much. Father had said that, and
told Draco that he was never allowed to pet the snake, no matter who
was watching. The venom killed your nerves so fast that you didn’t have
time to feel pain as the poison spread. You could die of it even after using
Healing Charms. It ate other snakes. It was as Slytherin as any creature
could possibly be.
That was why a Blue Krait head had been forged into the handle of
Father’s cane.
The bright snake blinked its eyes, which were also silver, and darted
out its tongue; and seemed to smile somehow, in a warmer way than any
reptile should.
And then Draco realized—
“But,” Draco said, still staring at the beautifully radiant snake, “you
can’t cast the Patronus Charm.” Now that Draco had cast it himself, he
understood why that was important. You could be evil, like Dumbledore, and still cast the Patronus Charm, so long as you had something
bright left inside you. But if Harry Potter didn’t have a single thought
inside him that shone like that—
“The Patronus Charm is more complicated than you think, Draco,”
Harry said seriously. “Not everyone who fails at casting it is a bad person, or even unhappy. But anyway, I can cast it. I did it on my second
try, after I realized what I’d done wrong facing the Dementor my ﬁrst
time. But, well, my life gets a little peculiar sometimes, and my Patronus
came out strange, and I’m keeping it a secret for now—”
“Am I supposed to just believe that?”
“You can ask Professor Quirrell if you don’t believe me,” said Harry.
“Ask him whether Harry Potter can cast a corporeal Patronus, and tell
him that I told you to ask. He’d know the request was from me, no one
else would know.”
Oh, and now Draco was to trust Professor Quirrell? Still, knowing
Harry, it might be true; and Professor Quirrell wouldn’t lie for trivial
reasons.
The glowing snake turned its head back and forth, as though seeking
a prey that wasn’t there, and then coiled itself into a circle, as though to
rest.
*

768 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

“I wonder,” Harry said softly, “when it was, which year, which generation, that Slytherins stopped trying to learn the Patronus Charm.
When it was that people started to think, that Slytherins themselves
started to think, that being cunning and ambitious was the same as being cold and unhappy. And if Salazar knew that his students didn’t even
bother showing up to learn the Patronus Charm any more, I wonder,
would he wish that he’d never been born? I wonder how it all went
wrong, when Slytherin’s House went wrong.”
The shining creature winked out, the turmoil rising in Draco making it impossible to sustain the Charm. Draco spun on Harry, he had
to control himself not to raise his wand. “What do you know about
Slytherin House or Salazar Slytherin? You were never Sorted into my
House, what gives you the right to—”
And that was when Draco ﬁnally realized.
“You did get Sorted into Slytherin!” Draco said. “You did, and afterwards you, you somehow, you snapped your ﬁngers—” Draco had once
asked Father if it would be cleverer to get Sorted into some other House
so that everyone would trust him, and Father had smiled and said that
he’d thought of that too at Draco’s age, but there was no way to fool the
Sorting Hat...
...not until Harry Potter came along.
How had he ever bought for one minute that Harry was a Ravenclaw?
“An interesting hypothesis,” Harry said equably. “Do you know,
you’re the second person in Hogwarts to come up with a theory along
those lines? At least you’re the second that’s actually said so to my face—”
“Snape,” Draco said with certainty. His Head of House was no fool.
“Professor Quirrell, of course,” said Harry. “Though come to think,
Severus did ask me how I managed to stay out of his House, and whether
I had something the Sorting Hat wanted. I suppose you could say you’re
number three. Oh, but Professor Quirrell’s theory was a little diﬀerent
than yours, though. May I have your word not to repeat it?”
Draco nodded without even really thinking about it. What was he
supposed to do, say no?
“Professor Quirrell thought that Dumbledore wasn’t happy with the
Hat’s choice for the Boy-Who-Lived.”
*

769 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

And the instant Harry said it, Draco knew, he knew that it was true,
it was just obvious. Who did Dumbledore even think he was fooling?
...well, besides every single other person in Hogwarts except Snape
and Quirrell, Harry might even believe it himself...
Draco stumbled back over to his desk in something of a daze, and sat
down hard enough to hurt slightly. This sort of thing happened around
once a month with Harry, and it hadn’t happened yet in January, so it
was time.
His fellow Slytherin, who might or might not think himself a Ravenclaw, sat back down in the chair he’d used earlier, now sitting on it crosswise, and looking up intently at Draco.
Draco didn’t know what he should be doing now, whether he should
be trying to persuade the lost Slytherin boy that, no, he wasn’t actually
a Ravenclaw... or trying to ﬁgure out whether Harry was in league with
Dumbledore, though that suddenly seemed less likely... but then why
had Harry set up the whole thing with him and Granger...
He really should have remembered that Harry was too weird for any
normal plots.
“Harry,” Draco said. “Did you deliberately antagonize me and General Sunshine just so we’d work together against you?”
Harry nodded without hesitation, as though it was the most normal
thing in the world, and nothing to be ashamed of.
“The whole thing with the gloves and making us climb up the walls
of Hogwarts, the only point was to make me and Granger more friendly
toward each other. And even before then. You’ve been plotting it for a
really long time. Since the beginning.”
Again the nod.
“Whyyyyy?”
Harry’s eyebrows lifted for a moment, the only reaction he showed
to Draco shrieking so loudly in the closed classroom that it hurt his own
ears. Why, why, why did Harry Potter DO this sort of thing...
Then Harry said, “So that Slytherins will be able to cast the Patronus
Charm again.”
“That... doesn’t... make... SENSE!” Draco was aware that he was losing
control of his voice, but he didn’t seem able to stop himself. “What does
*

770 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

that have to do with Granger?”
“Patterns,” Harry said. His face was very serious now, and very
grave. “Like a quarter of children born to Squib couples being wizards.
A simple, unmistakable pattern you would recognize instantly, if you
knew what you were looking at; even though, if you didn’t know, you
wouldn’t even realize it was a clue. The poison in Slytherin House is
something that’s been seen before in the Muggle world. This is an advance prediction, Draco, I could have written it down for you before our
ﬁrst day of school, just from hearing you talk in King’s Cross Station.
Let me describe some really pathetic sorts of people that hang around
at your father’s political rallies, pureblood families that would never be
invited to dinner at Malfoy Manor. Bearing in mind that I’ve never met
them, I’m just predicting it from recognizing the pattern of what’s happening to Slytherin House—”
And Harry Potter proceeded to describe the Parkinsons and Montagues and Boles with a calmly cutting accuracy that Draco wouldn’t
have dared think to himself in case there was a Legilimens around, it was
beyond insult, they would kill Harry if they ever heard...
“To sum up,” Harry ﬁnished, “they don’t have any power themselves.
They don’t have any wealth themselves. If they didn’t have Muggleborns
to hate, if all the Muggleborns vanished the way they say they want,
they’d wake up one morning and ﬁnd they had nothing. But so long as
they can say purebloods are superior, they can feel superior themselves,
they can feel like part of the master class. Even though your father would
never dream of inviting them to dinner, even though there’s not one
Galleon in their vaults, even if they did worse on their owls than the
worst Muggleborn in Hogwarts. Even if they can’t cast the Patronus
Charm any more. Everything is the Muggleborns’ fault to them, they
have someone besides themselves to blame for their own failures, and
that makes them even weaker. That’s what Slytherin House is becoming,
pathetic, and the root of the problem is hating Muggleborns.”
“Salazar Slytherin himself said that mudbloods needed to be cast out!
That they were weakening our blood—” Draco’s voice had risen to a
shout.
“Salazar was wrong as a question of simple fact! You know that, Draco!
*

771

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

And that hatred is poisoning your whole House, you couldn’t cast the
Patronus Charm using a thought like that!”
“Then why could Salazar Slytherin cast the Patronus Charm?”
Harry was wiping sweat from his forehead. “Because things have
changed between then and now! Listen, Draco, three hundred years ago
you could ﬁnd great scientists, as great as Salazar in their own way, who
would have told you that some other Muggles were inferior because of
their skin color—”
“Skin color?” said Draco.
“I know, skin color instead of anything important like blood purity,
isn’t it ridiculous? But then something in the world changed, and now
you can’t ﬁnd any great scientists who still think skin color should matter, only loser people like the ones I described to you. Salazar Slytherin
made the mistake when everyone else was making it, because he grew up
believing it, not because he was desperate for someone to hate. There were
a few people who did better than everyone else around them, and they
were exceptionally good. But the ones who just accepted what everyone
else thought weren’t exceptionally evil. The sad fact is that most people
just don’t notice a moral issue at all unless someone else is pointing it
out to them; and once they’re as old as Salazar was when he met Godric, they’ve lost the ability to change their minds. Only then Hogwarts
was built, and Hogwarts started sending acceptance letters to Muggleborns like Godric insisted, and more and more people began to notice
that Muggleborns weren’t any diﬀerent. Now it’s a big political issue
instead of something that everyone just believes without thinking about
it. And the correct answer is that Muggleborns aren’t any weaker than
purebloods. So now the people who end up siding with what Salazar
once believed, are either people who grew up in very closed pureblood
environments like you, or people who are so pathetic themselves that
they’re desperate for someone to feel superior to, people who love to
hate.”
“That doesn’t... that doesn’t sound right...” Draco’s voice said. His
ears listened, and wondered that he couldn’t come up with anything better to say.
“It doesn’t? Draco, you know now there’s nothing wrong with Her*

772 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

mione Granger. You had trouble dropping her oﬀ a roof, I hear. Even
though you knew she’d taken a Feather-Falling Potion, even though you
knew she was safe. What sort of person do you think wants to kill her,
not for any wrong she did to them, just because she’s a Muggleborn?
Even though she’s, she’s just a young girl who would help them with
their homework in a second, if they ever asked her,” Harry’s voice broke,
“what sort of person wants her to die?”
Father—
Draco felt split in two, he seemed to be having a problem with dual
vision, Granger is a mudblood, she should die and a girl hanging from his
hand on the rooftop, like seeing double, seeing double—
“And anyone who doesn’t want Hermione Granger to die, won’t
want to hang around the sort of people who do! That’s all people think
Slytherin is now, not clever planning, not trying to achieve greatness,
just hating Muggleborns! I paid Morag a Sickle to ask Padma why she
hadn’t gone to Slytherin, we both know she got the option. And Morag
told me that Padma just gave her a look and said that she wasn’t Pansy
Parkinson. You see? The best students with the virtues of more than
one House, the students with choices, they go under the Hat thinking
anywhere but Slytherin, and someone like Padma ends up in Ravenclaw.
And... I think the Sorting Hat tries to maintain a balance in the Sorting,
so it ﬁlls out the ranks of Slytherin with anyone who isn’t repelled by all
the hatred. So instead of Padma Patil, Slytherin gets Pansy Parkinson.
She’s not very cunning, and she’s not very ambitious, but she’s the sort
of person who doesn’t mind what Slytherin is turning into. And the
more Padmas go to Ravenclaw and the more Pansies go to Slytherin, the
more the process accelerates. It’s destroying Slytherin House, Draco!”
It had a ring of awful truth, Padma had belonged in Slytherin...
and instead Slytherin got Pansy... Father rallied lesser families like the
Parkinsons because they were convenient sources of support, but Father hadn’t realized the consequences of associating Slytherin’s name with
them...
“I can’t—” Draco said, but he wasn’t even sure what he couldn’t
do—“What do you want from me?”
“I’m not sure how to heal Slytherin House,” Harry said slowly. “But
*

773 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

I know it’s something you and I will end up having to do. It took
centuries for science to dawn over the Muggle world, it only happened
slowly, but the stronger science got, the further that sort of hatred retreated.” Harry’s voice was quiet, now. “I don’t know exactly why it
worked that way, but that’s how it happened historically. As though
there’s something in science like the shine of the Patronus Charm, driving back all sorts of darkness and madness, not right away, but it seems
to follow wherever science goes. The Enlightenment, that was what it
was called in the Muggle world. It has something to do with seeking
the truth, I think... with being able to change your mind from what you
grew up believing... with thinking logically, realizing that there’s no reason to hate someone because their skin is a diﬀerent color, just like there’s
no reason to hate Hermione Granger... or maybe there’s something to it
that even I don’t understand. But the Enlightenment is something that
you and I belong to now, both of us. Fixing Slytherin House is just one
of the things we have to do.”
“Let me think,” Draco said, his voice coming out in something of a
croak, “please,” and he rested his head in his hands, and thought.

**
*
Draco thought for a while, with his palms over his eyes to shut out the
world, no sound but his and Harry’s breathing. All the persuasive reasonableness of what Harry said, the evident grains of truth that it contained; and against that, the obvious, the perfectly and entirely obvious
hypothesis about what was really going on...
After a time, Draco ﬁnally raised his head.
“It sounds right,” Draco said quietly.
A huge smile broke out on Harry’s face.
“So,” Draco continued, “is this where you bring me to Dumbledore,
to make it oﬃcial?”
He kept his voice very casual as he said it.
“Oh, yeah,” Harry said. “That was the thing I was going to ask you
about, actually—”
*

774 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

Draco’s blood froze in his veins, froze solid and shattered—
“Professor Quirrell said something to me that got me thinking, and,
well, no matter how you answer this question, I’m already stupid for
having not asked you a lot earlier. Everyone in Gryﬃndor thinks Dumbledore is a saint, the Huﬄepuﬀs think he’s crazy, the Ravenclaws are
all proud of themselves for having worked out that he’s only pretending to be crazy, but I never asked anyone in Slytherin. I’m supposed to
know better than to make that sort of mistake. But if even you think
Dumbledore’s okay to conspire with on ﬁxing Slytherin House, I guess
I didn’t miss anything important.”
...
...
...
“You know,” Draco said, his voice remarkably calm, all things considered, “every time I wonder if you do things like this just to annoy me,
I tell myself that it has to be accidental, no one could possibly do this sort
of thing on purpose even if they tried until blood trickled out of their
ears. That’s the only reason I’m not going to strangle you now.”
“Huh?”
And then strangle himself, because Harry had grown up with Muggles, and then Dumbledore had smoothly diverted him from Slytherin
to Ravenclaw, so it was perfectly plausible that Harry might not know
anything, and Draco had never thought to tell him.
Or else Harry had guessed that Draco wouldn’t join up with Dumbledore so readily, and this itself was just the next step of Dumbledore’s
plan...
But if Harry really didn’t know about Dumbledore, then warning
him had to take precedence over everything.
“All right,” Draco said, after he’d had a chance to organize his
thoughts. “I don’t know where to start, so I’ll just start somewhere.”
Draco drew a deep breath. This was going to take a while. “Dumbledore murdered his little sister, and got away with it because his brother
wouldn’t testify against him—”

**
*
*

775 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

Harry listened with increasing worry and dismay. Harry had been prepared, he’d thought, to take the blood purist side of the story with a
grain of salt. The trouble was that even after you added an enormous
amount of salt, it still didn’t sound good.
Dumbledore’s father had been convicted of using Unforgivable
Curses on children, and died in Azkaban. That was no sin of Dumbledore’s, but it would be a matter of public record. Harry could check
that part, and see whether all of this had been made up out of thin air
by the blood purists.
Dumbledore’s mother had died mysteriously, shortly before his
younger sister died in what the Aurors had ruled to be murder. Supposedly that sister had been brutalized by Muggles and never spoken
again after that; which, Draco had observed, sounded remarkably like a
botched Obliviation.
After Harry’s ﬁrst few interruptions, Draco had seemed to pick up
on the general principle, and was now presenting the observations ﬁrst
and the inferences afterward.
“—so you don’t have to take my word for it,” said Draco, “you can see
it, right? Anyone in Slytherin can. Dumbledore waited to ﬁght his duel
with Grindelwald until the exact moment when it would look best for
Dumbledore, after Grindelwald had ruined most of Europe and built
up a reputation as the most terrible Dark Wizard in history, and just
when Grindelwald had lost the gold and blood sacriﬁces he was getting
from his Muggle pawns and was about to start heading downhill. If
Dumbledore was really the noble wizard he pretended to be, he’d have
fought Grindelwald long before that. Dumbledore probably wanted Europe ruined, it was probably part of their plan together, he only attacked
Grindelwald after his puppet failed him. And that big ﬂashy duel wasn’t
real, there’s no way two wizards would be so exactly matched that they’d
ﬁght for twenty whole hours until one of them fell over from exhaustion, that was just Dumbledore making it look more spectacular.” Here
Draco’s voice became more indignant. “And that got Dumbledore made
Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot! The Line of Merlin Unbroken, cor-

*

776 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

rupted after ﬁfteen hundred years! And then he became Supreme Mugwump on top of that, and he already had Hogwarts to use as an invincible
fortress—Headmaster and Chief Warlock and Supreme Mugwump, no
normal person would try to do all that at once, how can anyone not see
that Dumbledore’s trying to take over the world?”
“Pause,” Harry said, and closed his eyes to think.
It wasn’t any worse than what you would have heard about the West
in Stalin’s Russia, and none of that would have been true. Though the
blood purists wouldn’t be able to get away with making stuﬀ up entirely... or would they? The Daily Prophet had shown a pronounced
tendency to make stuﬀ up... but then again, when they stuck out their
neck too far on the Weasley betrothal, they had been called on it and
they had been embarrassed...
Harry opened his eyes, and saw that Draco was watching him with
a steady, waiting gaze.
“So when you asked me if it was time to join up with Dumbledore,
that was just a test.”
Draco nodded.
“And before that, when you said it sounded right—”
“It sounds right,” said Draco. “But I don’t know if I can trust you.
Are you going to complain about my testing you, Mr. Potter? Are you
going to say that I fooled you? That I led you on?”
Harry knew he should smile like a good sport, but he couldn’t really,
it was too much of a disappointment.
“You’re right, it’s fair, I can’t complain,” Harry said instead. “So
what about He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named? Not as bad as he was made
out to be?”
Draco looked bitter, at that. “So you think it’s all just making Father’s side look good and Dumbledore’s side look bad, and that I believe
it all myself just because Father told me.”
“It’s a possibility I’m considering,” Harry said evenly.
Draco’s voice was low and intense. “They knew. My father knew,
his friends knew. They knew the Dark Lord was evil. But he was the only
chance anyone had against Dumbledore! The only wizard anywhere who
was powerful enough to ﬁght him! Some of the other Death Eaters were
*

777 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

truly evil too, like Bellatrix Black—Father isn’t like that—but Father and
his friends had to do it, Harry, they had to, Dumbledore was taking over
everything, the Dark Lord was the only hope anyone had left!”
Draco was staring hard at Harry. Harry met the gaze, trying to
think. Nobody ever thought of themselves as the villain of their own
story—maybe Lord Voldemort did, maybe Bellatrix did, but Draco certainly didn’t. That the Death Eaters were bad guys was not in question.
The question was whether they were the bad guys; whether there was
one villain in the story, or two...
“You’re not convinced,” Draco said. He looked worried, and a little
angry. Which didn’t surprise Harry. He was pretty sure Draco himself
believed all this.
“Should I be convinced?” Harry said. He didn’t look away. “Just because you believe it? Are you a strong enough rationalist now that your
belief is strong evidence to me, because you’d be very unlikely to believe
it if it weren’t true? When I met you, you weren’t that strong. Everything you told me, did you rethink it after you awakened as a scientist,
or is it just something you grew up believing? Can you look me in the
eyes and swear to me upon the honor of House Malfoy that if there’s
one untruth buried in what you said, one thing that got added on just
to make Dumbledore look a little worse, you would have noticed?”
Draco started to open his mouth, and Harry said, “Don’t. Don’t
stain the honor of House Malfoy. You’re not that strong yet, and you
should know it. Listen, Draco, I’ve started to notice some worrying
things myself. But there’s nothing deﬁnite, nothing certain, it’s all just
deductions and hypotheses and untrustworthy witnesses... And there’s
nothing certain in your story, either. Dumbledore might’ve had some
other good reason not to ﬁght Grindelwald years earlier—though it
would have to be a pretty good excuse, especially considering what was
happening on the Muggle side of things... but still. Is there one clearly
evil thing that Dumbledore’s done for certain, so I don’t have to wonder?”
Draco’s breathing was harsh. “All right,” Draco said in an uneven
voice, “I’ll tell you what Dumbledore did.” From Draco’s robes came a
wand, and Draco said “Quietus”, then “Quietus” again, but he got the
*

778 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

pronunciation wrong a second time, and ﬁnally Harry took out his own
wand and did it.
“There,” said Draco hoarsely, “once upon a time there, there was a
girl, and her name was Narcissa, and she was the prettiest, the smartest,
the most cunning girl that was ever Sorted into Slytherin, and my father
loved her, and they married, and she wasn’t a Death Eater, she wasn’t a
ﬁghter, all she ever did was love Father—” Draco stopped there, because
he was crying.
Harry felt sick to his stomach. Draco had never talked about his
mother, not once, he should have noticed that earlier. “She... got in the
way of a curse?”
Draco’s voice came out in a scream. “Dumbledore burned her to death
in her own bedroom!”

**
*
In a classroom ﬁlled with soft silver light, one boy is staring at another
boy, who is sobbing, wiping frantically at his eyes with the sleeves of his
robes.
It was hard for Harry to stay balanced, to keep withholding judgment, it was too emotional, there was something that either wanted to
start tears from his own eyes in sympathy with Draco, or know that it
wasn’t true...
Dumbledore burned her to death in her own bedroom!
That...
...didn’t sound like Dumbledore’s style...
...but you could only think that thought so many times, before you
started to wonder about the trustworthiness of that whole ‘style’ concept.
“It, it must have hurt horribly,” Draco said, his voice shaking, “Father never talks about it at all, you don’t ever talk about it in front of
him, but Mr. Macnair told me, there were scorch marks all over the bedroom, from how Mother must have struggled while Dumbledore burned
her alive. That is the debt Dumbledore owes to House Malfoy and we
will have his life for it!”
*

779 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

“Draco,” Harry said, he let all of the hoarseness into his own voice,
it would be wrong to sound calm, “I’m sorry, I’m so sorry for asking,
but I have to know, how do you know it was Dumble—”
“Dumbledore said he did it, he told Father it was a warning! And
Father couldn’t testify under Veritaserum because he was an Occlumens,
he couldn’t even get Dumbledore put on trial, Father’s own allies didn’t
believe him after Dumbledore just denied everything in public, but we
know, the Death Eaters know, Father wouldn’t have any reason to lie
about that, Father would want us to take revenge on the right person,
can’t you see that Harry?” Draco’s voice was wild.
Unless Lucius did it himself, of course, and found it more convenient to
blame Dumbledore.
Although... it also didn’t seem like Lucius’s style. And if he had murdered Narcissa, it would have been smarter to pin the blame on an easier
victim instead of losing political capital and credibility by going after
Dumbledore...
In time, Draco stopped crying, and looked at Harry. “Well?” said
Draco, sounding like he wanted to spit the words. “Is that evil enough
for you, Mr. Potter?”
Harry looked down at where his arms rested on the back of his chair.
He couldn’t meet Draco’s eyes any more, the pain in them was too raw.
“I wasn’t expecting to hear that,” Harry said softly. “I don’t know what
to think any more.”
“You don’t know?” Draco’s voice rose to a shriek, and he stood up
abruptly from his desk—
“I remembered the Dark Lord killing my parents,” Harry said.
“When I went in front of the Dementor the ﬁrst time, that was what
I remembered, the worst memory. Even though it was so long ago. I
heard them dying. My mother begged the Dark Lord not to kill me, not
Harry, please no, take me, kill me instead! That’s what she said. And the
Dark Lord mocked her, and laughed. Then, I remember, the ﬂash of
green light—”
Harry looked up at Draco.
“So we could ﬁght,” Harry said, “we could just keep on with the
same ﬁght. You could tell me that it was right for my mother to die,
*

780 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

because she was the wife of James, who killed a Death Eater. But bad
for your mother to die, because she was innocent. And I could tell you
that it was right for your mother to die, that Dumbledore must have had
some reason that made it okay to burn her alive in her own bedroom; but
bad for my mother to die. But you know, Draco, either way, wouldn’t
it be obvious that we were just being biased? Because the rule that says
that it’s wrong to kill innocent people, that rule can’t switch on for my
mother and oﬀ for yours, and it can’t switch on for your mother and oﬀ
for mine. If you tell me that Lily was an enemy of the Death Eaters and
it’s right to kill your enemies, then the same rule says that Dumbledore
was right to kill Narcissa, since she was his enemy.” Harry’s voice went
hoarse. “So if the two of us are going to agree on anything, it’s going to
be that neither of their deaths were right and that no one’s mother should
die any more.”

**
*
The fury boiling inside Draco was so great that he could barely stop himself from storming out of the room; all that halted him was the recognition of a critical moment; and a small remnant of friendship, a tiny ﬂash
of sympathy, for he had forgotten, he’d forgotten, that Harry’s mother
and father were dead by the Dark Lord’s hand.
The silence stretched.
“You can talk,” Harry said, “Draco, talk to me, I won’t get angry—
are you thinking, I don’t know, that Narcissa dying was much worse
than Lily dying? That it’s wrong for me even to make the comparison?”
“I guess I was stupid too,” Draco said. “All this time, all this time I
forgot that you must hate the Death Eaters for killing your parents, hate
Death Eaters the way I hate Dumbledore.” And Harry had never said
anything, never reacted when Draco talked about Death Eaters, kept it
hidden—Draco was a fool.
“No,” Harry said. “It’s not—it’s not like that, Draco, I, I don’t even
know how to explain to you, except to say that a thought like that,
wouldn’t,” Harry’s voice choked, “you wouldn’t ever be able to use it,
to cast the Patronus Charm...”
*

781

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

Draco felt a sudden wrench in his heart, unwanted but he felt it. “Are
you pretending you’re just going to forget about your own parents? Are
you saying I should just forget about Mother?”
“So you and I have to be enemies then?” Now Harry’s voice was
growing equally wild. “What have we ever done to each other that means
we have to be enemies? I refuse to be trapped like that! Justice can’t
mean that both of us should attack each other, it doesn’t make sense!”
Harry stopped, took a deep breath, ran his ﬁngers back through the deliberate mess of his hair—the ﬁngers came away sweaty, Draco could see
it. “Draco, listen, we can’t expect to meet on everything right away, you
and I. So I won’t ask you to say that the Dark Lord was wrong to kill my
mother, just say that it was... sad. We won’t talk about whether or not it
was necessary, whether it was justiﬁed. I’ll just ask you to say that it was
sad that it happened, that my mother’s life was valuable too, you’ll just
say that for now. And I’ll say it was sad that Narcissa died, because her
life was also worth something. We can’t expect to agree on everything
right away, but if we start out by saying that every life is precious, that
it’s sad when anyone dies, then I know we’ll meet someday. That’s what
I want you to say. Not who was right. Not who was wrong. Just that
it was sad when your mother died, and sad when my mother died, and
it would be sad if Hermione Granger died, every life is precious, can we
agree on that and let the rest go by for now, is it enough if we just agree
on that? Can we, Draco? That seems... more like a thought someone
could use to cast the Patronus Charm.”
There were tears in Harry’s eyes.
And Draco was getting angry again. “Dumbledore killed Mother,
it’s not enough to just say it’s sad! I don’t understand what you think
you have to do, but the Malfoys have to take revenge!” Not avenging the
deaths of family went beyond weakness, beyond dishonor, you might as
well not exist.
“I’m not arguing with that,” Harry said quietly. “But will you say
that Lily Potter’s death was sad? Just say that one thing?”
“That’s...” Draco was having diﬃculty ﬁnding words again. “I know,
I know how you feel, but don’t you see Harry, even if I just say that Lily
Potter’s death was sad, that’s already going against the Death Eaters!”
*

782 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

Harry’s voice was pleading. “Draco, you’ve got to be able to say the
Death Eaters were wrong about some things. You have to, you can’t
progress as a scientist otherwise, there’ll be a roadblock in your way, an
authority you can’t contradict. Not every change is an improvement,
but every improvement is a change, you can’t do anything better unless
you can manage to do it diﬀerently, you’ve got to let yourself do better than
other people! Even your father, Draco, even him. You’ve got to be able
to point to something your father did and say it was mistaken, because
he wasn’t perfect, and if you can’t say that, you can’t do better.”
Father had warned him, every night before he went to sleep for a
month before he went to Hogwarts, that there would be people with
this goal.
“You’re trying to break me loose of Father.”
“Trying to break a part of you loose,” said Harry. “Trying to let you
ﬁx some things your father got mistaken. Trying to let you do better.
But not... trying to break your Patronus!” Harry’s voice got softer. “I
wouldn’t want to break something bright like that. Who knows, ﬁxing
Slytherin House might need that, too...”
It was getting to Draco, that was the thing, despite everything it was
getting to him, you had to be really careful around Harry because his
arguments sounded so convincing even when he was wrong. “And what
you’re not admitting is that Dumbledore told you that you could avenge
your parents’ deaths by taking Lord Malfoy’s son from him—”
“No. No. That part’s just wrong.” Harry took a deep breath. “I did
not know who Dumbledore was, or who the Dark Lord was, or who
the Death Eaters were, or how my parents died, until three days before
I came to Hogwarts. The day you and I ﬁrst met in the clothes shop,
that was the day I learned. And Dumbledore doesn’t even like Muggle
science, or he says he doesn’t, I got a chance to probe him on it once.
The thought of taking revenge on the Death Eaters through you has
never crossed my mind, not even once until now. I didn’t know who the
Malfoys were when I met you in the clothes shop, and then I liked you.”
There was a long silence.
“I wish I could trust you,” Draco said. His voice was shaking. “If I
could just know you were telling the truth, everything would be so much
*

783 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

simpler—”
And then suddenly it came to Draco.
The way to know whether Harry Potter really meant everything he
said, about wanting to ﬁx Slytherin House, about being sad that Mother
had died.
It would be illegal, and since he’d have to do it without Father’s help,
it would be dangerous, he couldn’t even trust Harry Potter to help, but...
“All right,” Draco said. “I’ve thought of a deﬁnitive experiment.”
“What is it?”
“I want to give you a drop of Veritaserum,” Draco said. “Just one
drop, so you can’t lie, but not enough to make you answer anything. I
don’t know where I’ll get it, but I’ll make certain it’s safe—”
“Um,” Harry said. There was a helpless look on his face. “Draco,
um—”
“Don’t say it,” Draco said. His voice was ﬁrm and calm. “If you say
no, that’s my experimental result right there.”
“Draco, I’m an Occlumens—”
“Oh that is such a lie—”
“I was trained by Mr. Bester. Professor Quirrell set it up. Look,
Draco, I’ll take one drop of Veritaserum if you can get it, I’m just
warning you that I’m an Occlumens. Not a perfect Occlumens, but
Mr. Bester said I was putting up a complete block, and I could probably
beat Veritaserum.”
“You’re in your ﬁrst year at Hogwarts! That’s just crazy!”
“Know a Legilimens you can trust? I’ll be happy to demonstrate—
look, Draco, I’m sorry, but doesn’t the fact that I told you count for
something? I could have just let you do it, you know.”
“Why? Why are you always like this, Harry? Why do you have to mess
everything up even when it’s impossible? And stop smiling, this isn’t funny!”
“I’m sorry, I’m sorry, I know it’s not funny, I—”
It took a while for Draco to get himself under control.
But Harry was right. Harry could have just let Draco administer
the Veritaserum. If he really was an Occlumens... Draco didn’t know
who he could ask to try Legilimency, but he could at least ask Professor
Quirrell if it was true... Could Draco trust Professor Quirrell? Maybe
*

784 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

Professor Quirrell would just say anything Harry asked him to.
Then Draco remembered the other thing Harry had told him to ask
Professor Quirrell, and thought of a diﬀerent test.
“You know,” said Draco. “You know what it costs me, if I agree that
the poison in Slytherin’s House is hating Muggleborns, and say that Lily
Potter’s death was sad. And that’s part of your plan, don’t tell me it’s not.”
Harry said nothing, which was wise of him.
“There’s something I want from you in return,” said Draco. “And
before then, an experimental test I want to try—”

**
*
Draco pushed open the door to which the portraits had directed them,
and this time it was the right door. Before them was a small empty place
of stone set against the night sky. Not a roof like the one he’d dropped
Harry from, but a tiny and proper courtyard, far above the ground.
With proper railings, elaborate traceries of stone that ﬂushed seamlessly
into the stone ﬂoor... How so much artistry had been infused into the
creation of Hogwarts was something that still awed Draco every time he
thought about it. There must have been some way to do it all at once,
no one could have detailed so much piece by piece, the castle changed
and every new piece was like that. It was so far beyond the wizardry of
these fading days that no one would have believed it if they hadn’t seen
the proof in Hogwarts itself.
Cloudless and cold, the winter night sky; it got dark long before
students’ curfew, in the ﬁnal days of January.
The stars shining brightly, in the clear air.
Harry had said that being under the stars would help him.
Draco touched his chest with his wand, slid his ﬁngers in a practiced
motion, and said, “Thermos.” A warmth spread through him, starting
from his heart; the wind went on blowing on his face, but he was no
longer cold.
“Thermos,” Harry’s voice said behind him.
*

785 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

They went together to the railing, to look down at the ground a long
way below. Draco tried to ﬁgure if they were in one of the towers that
could be seen from outside, and found that right now he couldn’t quite
seem to picture how Hogwarts looked from outside. But the ground
below was always the same; he could see the Forbidden Forest as a vague
outline, and moonlight glittering from the Hogwarts Lake.
“You know,” Harry’s voice said quietly from beside him where his
arms leaned on the railing next to Draco’s, “one of the things that Muggles get really wrong, is that they don’t turn all their lights out at night.
Not even for one hour every month, not even for ﬁfteen minutes once
a year. The photons scatter in the atmosphere and wash out all but the
brightest stars, and the night sky doesn’t look the same at all, not unless you go far away from any cities. Once you’ve looked up at the sky
over Hogwarts, it’s hard to imagine living in a Muggle city, where you
wouldn’t be able to see the stars. You certainly wouldn’t want to spend
your whole life in Muggle cities, once you’d seen the night sky over
Hogwarts.”
Draco glanced at Harry, and found that Harry was craning his neck
to stare up at where the Milky Way arched across the darkness.
“Of course,” Harry went on, his voice still quiet, “you can’t ever see
the stars properly from Earth, either, the air always gets in the way. You
have to look from somewhere else, if you want to see the real thing,
the stars burning hard and bright, like their true selves. Have you ever
wished that you could just whisk yourself up into the night sky, Draco,
and go look at what there is to see around other Suns than ours? If there
were no limit to the power of your magic, is that one of the things you
would do, if you could do anything?”
There was a silence, and then Draco realized that he was expected to
answer. “I didn’t think of it before,” Draco said. Without any conscious
decision, his voice came out as soft and hushed as Harry’s. “Do you
really think anyone would ever be able to do that?”
“I don’t think it’ll be that easy,” said Harry. “But I know I don’t
mean to spend my whole life on Earth.”
It would have been something to laugh at, if Draco hadn’t known
that some Muggles had already left, without even using magic.
*

786 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

“To pass your test,” Harry said, “I’m going to have to say what it
means to me, that thought, the whole thing, not the shorter version I
tried to explain to you before. But you should be able to see it’s the
same idea, only more general. So my version of the thought, Draco, is
that when we go out into the stars, we might ﬁnd other people there.
And if so, they certainly won’t look like we do. There might be things
out there that are grown from crystal, or big pulsating blobs... or they
might be made of magic, now that I think about it. Yeah, actually, now
that I know about magic, I have to expect that things might really be
strange out there. So with all that strangeness, how do you recognize a
person? Not by the shape, not by how many arms or legs it has. Not
by the sort of substance it’s made out of, whether that’s ﬂesh or crystal
or stuﬀ I can’t imagine. You would have to recognize them as people
from their minds. And even their minds wouldn’t work just like ours
do. But anything that lives and thinks and knows itself and doesn’t want
to die, it’s sad, Draco, it’s sad if that person has to die, because it doesn’t
want to. Compared to what might be out there, every human being
who ever lived, we’re all like brothers and sisters, you could hardly even
tell us apart. The ones out there who met us, they wouldn’t see British
or French, they wouldn’t be able to tell the diﬀerence, they’d just see a
human being. Humans who can love, and hate, and laugh, and cry; and
to them, the ones out there, that would make us all as alike as peas in the
same pod. They would be diﬀerent, though. Really diﬀerent. But that
wouldn’t stop us, and it wouldn’t stop them, if we both wanted to be
friends together.”
Harry raised his wand then, and Draco turned, and looked away, as
he had promised; looked toward the stone ﬂoor and stone wall in which
the door was set. For Draco had promised not to look, and not to tell
anyone of what Harry had said, or anything at all of what happened here
this night, though he didn’t know why it was to be so secret.
“I have a dream,” said Harry’s voice, “that one day sentient beings
will be judged by the patterns of their minds, and not their color or their
shape or the stuﬀ they’re made of, or who their parents were. Because
if we can get along with crystal things someday, how silly would it be
not to get along with Muggleborns, who are shaped like us, and think
*

787 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

like us, as alike to us as peas in a pod? The crystal things wouldn’t even
be able to tell the diﬀerence. How impossible is it to imagine that the
hatred poisoning Slytherin House would be worth taking with us to
the stars? Every life is precious, everything that thinks and knows itself
and doesn’t want to die. Lily Potter’s life was precious, and Narcissa
Malfoy’s life was precious, even though it’s too late for them now, it was
sad when they died. But there are other lives that are still alive to be
fought for. Your life, and my life, and Hermione Granger’s life, all the
lives of Earth, and all the lives beyond, to be defended and protected,
Expecto Patronum!”
And there was light.
Everything turned to silver in that light, the stone ﬂoor, the stone
wall, the door, the railings, so dazzling just in the reﬂection that you
could hardly even see them, even the air seemed to shine, and the light
grew brighter, and brighter, and brighter—
When the light ended it was like a shock, Draco’s hand went automatically to his robe to bring out a handkerchief, and it was only then
that he realized he was crying.
“There is your experimental result,” Harry’s voice said quietly. “I
really did mean it, that thought.”
Draco slowly turned toward Harry, who had lowered his wand now.
“That, that’s got to be a trick, right?” Draco said. He couldn’t
take many more of these shocks. “Your Patronus—can’t really be that
bright—” And yet it had been Patronus light, once you knew what you
were looking at, you couldn’t mistake it for anything else.
“That was the true form of the Patronus Charm,” Harry said. “Something that lets you put all your strength into the Patronus, without hindrance from within yourself. And before you ask, I did not learn it from
Dumbledore. He does not know the secret, and could not cast the true
form if he did. I solved the puzzle for myself. And I knew, once I understood, that this spell must not be spoken of. For your sake, I undertook
your test; but you must not speak of it, Draco.”
Draco didn’t know any more, he didn’t know where the true strength
lay, or the right of things. Double vision, double vision. Draco wanted
to call Harry’s ideals weakness, Huﬄepuﬀ foolishness, the sort of lie that
*

788 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

rulers told to placate the populace and that Harry had been silly enough
to believe for himself, foolishness taken seriously and raised up to insane
heights, projected out onto the stars themselves—
Something beautiful and hidden, mysterious and bright—
“Will I,” whispered Draco, “be able to cast a Patronus like that, someday?”
“If you always keep seeking the truth,” Harry said, “and if you don’t
refuse the warm thoughts when you ﬁnd them, then I’m sure you will. I
think a person could get anywhere if they just kept going long enough,
even to the stars.”
Draco wiped his eyes with his handkerchief again.
“We should go back inside,” Draco said in an unsteady voice, “someone could’ve seen it, all that light—”
Harry nodded, and moved to and through the door; and Draco
looked up at the night sky one last time before he followed.
Who was the Boy-Who-Lived, that he was already an Occlumens, and
could cast the true form of the Patronus Charm, and do other strange
things? What was Harry’s Patronus, why must it stay unseen?
Draco didn’t ask any of those questions, because Harry might have
answered, and Draco just couldn’t take any more shocks today. He just
couldn’t. One more shock and his head was going to just fall right oﬀ
his shoulders and go bounce, bounce, bounce down the corridors of
Hogwarts.

**
*
They’d ducked into a small alcove, instead of going all the way back to
the classroom, at Draco’s request; he was feeling too nervous to put it
oﬀ any longer.
Draco put up a Quieting barrier, and then looked at Harry in silent
question.
“I’ve been thinking about it,” Harry said. “I’ll do it, but there are
ﬁve conditions—”
“Five?”
*

789 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

“Yes, ﬁve. Look, Draco, a pledge like this is just begging to go terribly
wrong somehow, you know it would go wrong if this were a play—”
“Well, it’s not!” Draco said. “Dumbledore killed Mother. He’s evil.
It’s one of those things you talk about that doesn’t have to be complicated.”
“Draco,” Harry said, his voice careful, “all I know is that you say
that Lucius says that Dumbledore says he killed Narcissa. To believe that
unquestioningly, I have to trust you and Lucius and Dumbledore. So
like I said, there are conditions. The ﬁrst one is that at any point you
can release me from the pledge, if it no longer seems like a good idea. It
has to be a deliberate and intended decision on your part, of course, not
a trick of wording or something.”
“Okay,” said Draco. That sounded safe enough.
“Condition two is that I’m pledging to take as an enemy whoever
actually did kill Narcissa, as determined to the honest best of my ability
as a rationalist. Whether that’s Dumbledore, or someone else. And you
have my word that I’ll exercise my best ability as a rationalist to keep
that judgment honest, as a question of simple fact. Agreed?”
“I don’t like it,” said Draco. He didn’t, the whole point was to make
sure Harry never went with Dumbledore. Still, if Harry was honest,
he’d catch on to Dumbledore soon enough; and if dishonest, he’d already
broken his word... “But I’ll agree.”
“Condition three is that Narcissa has to have been burned alive. If
that part of the story turns out to be something exaggerated just to make
it sound a little worse, then I get to decide for myself whether or not to
still go through with the pledge. Good people sometimes have to kill.
But they don’t ever torture people to death. It’s because Narcissa was
burned alive that I know whoever did that was evil.”
Draco was frowning ﬁercely now.
“Condition four is that if Narcissa got her own hands dirty, and, say,
Crucioed someone’s child into insanity, and that person burned Narcissa
for revenge, the deal might be oﬀ again. Because then it was still wrong
for them to burn her, they still should’ve just killed her without pain;
but it wasn’t evil the same way as if she was just Lucius’s love who never
did anything herself, like you said. Condition ﬁve is that if whoever
*

790 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

killed Narcissa was tricked somehow into doing it, then my enemy is
whoever tricked them, not the person who was tricked.”
“All this really sounds like you’re planning to weasel out of it—”
“Draco, I won’t take a good person as an enemy, not for you or
anyone. I have to really believe they’re in the wrong. But I’ve thought
about it, and it seems to me that if Narcissa didn’t do any evil with her
own hands, just fell in love with Lucius and chose to stay his wife, then
whoever burned her alive in her own bedroom isn’t likely to be a good
guy. And I’ll pledge to take as my enemy whoever made that happen,
whether it’s Dumbledore or anyone else, unless you deliberately release
me from that pledge. Hopefully that won’t go wrong the way it would
if this were a play.”
“I’m not happy,” said Draco. “But okay. You pledge to take my
mother’s murderer as your enemy, and I’ll—”
Harry waited, with a patient look on his face, while Draco tried to
make his voice work again.
“I’ll help you ﬁx the problem with Slytherin House hating Muggleborns,” Draco ﬁnished in a whisper. “And I’ll say it was sad that Lily
Potter died.”
“So be it,” said Harry.
“So be it,” said Draco.
And it was done.
The break, Draco knew, had just widened a little more. No, not a
little, a lot. There was a sensation of drifting away, of being lost, further
and further from shore, further and further from home...
“Excuse me,” Draco said. He turned away from Harry, and then
tried to calm himself, he had to do this test, and he didn’t want to fail it
from being nervous or ashamed.
Draco raised his wand into the starting position for the Patronus
Charm.
Remembered falling from his broomstick, the pain, the fear, imagined it coming from a tall ﬁgure in a cloak, looking like a dead thing left
in water.
And then Draco closed his eyes, the better to remember Father holding his small, cold hands in his own warm strength.
*

791

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

Don’t be frightened, my son, I’m here...
The wand swung up in a broad brandish, to drive the fear away, and
Draco was surprised at the strength of it; and he remembered in that
moment that Father wasn’t lost, would never be lost, would always be
there and strong in his own person, no matter what happened to Draco,
and his voice cried, “Expecto Patronum!”
Draco opened his eyes.
A shining snake looked back at him, no less bright than before.
Behind him, he heard Harry exhale a breath, as though in relief.
Draco gazed into the white light. It seemed he wasn’t lost completely,
after all.
“That reminds me,” said Harry after a while. “Can we test my hypothesis about how to use a Patronus to send messages?”
“Is it going to surprise me?” said Draco. “I don’t want any more
surprises today.”

**
*
Harry had claimed that the idea wasn’t all that strange and he didn’t see
how it could possibly shock Draco in any way, which made Draco feel
even more nervous, somehow; but Draco could see how important it
was to have a way of sending messages in emergencies.
The trick—or so Harry hypothesized—was wanting to spread the
good news, wanting the recipient to know the truth of whatever happy
thought you’d used to cast the Patronus Charm. Only instead of telling
the recipient in words, the Patronus itself was the message. By wanting
them to see that, the Patronus would go to them.
“Tell Harry,” said Draco to the luminous snake, even though Harry
was standing only a few paces away on the other side of the room, “to,
um, beware the green monkey,” this being a sign from a play Draco had
once seen.
And then, just like at King’s Cross station, Draco wanted Harry to
know that Father had always cared for him; only this time he didn’t try
to say it in words, but wanted to say it with the happy thought itself.
*

792 *

**
*

PERSONHOOD THEORY

*
*

*

The bright snake slithered across the room, looking more like it was
slithering through the air rather than the stone itself; it got to Harry
after traveling that short distance—
—and said to Harry, in a strange voice that Draco recognized as how
he himself probably sounded to other people, “Beware the green monkey.”
“Hsssss ssss sshsshssss,” said Harry.
The snake slithered back across the ﬂoor to Draco.
“Harry says the message is received and acknowledged,” said the shining Blue Krait in Draco’s voice.
“Huh,” Harry said. “Talking to Patronuses feels odd.”
...
...
...
...
“Why are you looking at me like that?” said the Heir of Slytherin.
Aftermath:
Harry stared at Draco.
“You mean just magical snakes, right?”
“N-no,” said Draco. He was looking rather pale, and was still stammering, but had at least stopped the incoherent noises he’d been making
earlier. “You’re a Parselmouth, you can speak Parseltongue, it’s the language of all snakes everywhere. You can understand any snake when it
talks, and they can understand when you talk to them... Harry, you
can’t possibly believe you were Sorted into Ravenclaw! You’re the Heir of
Slytherin!”
...
...
...
...
...
“Snakes are sentient?”

*

793 *

CHAPTER

FORT Y-EIGHT

UTILITARIAN PRIORITIES
t was Saturday, the ﬁrst morning of February, and at the Ravenclaw
table, a boy bearing a breakfast plate heaped high with vegetables
was nervously inspecting his servings for the slightest trace of meat.
It might have been an overreaction. After he’d gotten over the raw
shock, Harry’s common sense had woken up and hypothesized that
“Parseltongue” was probably just a linguistic user interface for controlling snakes...
...after all, snakes couldn’t really be human-level intelligent, someone would have noticed by now. The smallest-brained creatures Harry
had ever heard of with anything like linguistic ability were the African
grey parrots taught by Irene Pepperberg. And that was unstructured
protolanguage, in a species that played complex games of adultery and
needed to model other parrots. While according to what Draco had
been able to remember, snakes spoke to Parselmouths in what sounded
like normal human language—i.e., full-blown recursive syntactical grammar. That had taken time for hominids to evolve, with huge brains and
strong social selection pressures. Snakes didn’t have much society at all
that Harry had ever heard. And with thousands upon thousands of different species of snakes all over the world, how could they all use the
same version of their supposed language, “Parseltongue”?
Of course that was all merely common sense, in which Harry was
starting to lose faith entirely.
But Harry was sure he’d heard snakes hissing on the TV at some
point—after all, he knew what that sounded like from somewhere—and
that hadn’t sounded to him like language, which had seemed a good deal
more reassuring...

I

*

795 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

...at ﬁrst. The problem was that Draco had also asserted that Parselmouths could send snakes on extended complex missions. And if that
was true, then Parselmouths had to make snakes persistently intelligent by
talking to them. In the worst-case scenario that would make the snake
self-aware, like what Harry had accidentally done to the Sorting Hat.
And when Harry had oﬀered that hypothesis, Draco had claimed
that he could remember a story—Harry hoped to Cthulhu that this one
story was just a fairy tale, it had that ring to it, but there was a story—
about Salazar Slytherin sending a brave young viper on a mission to
gather information from other snakes.
If any snake a Parselmouth had talked to, could make other snakes
self-aware by talking to them, then...
Then...
Harry didn’t even know why his mind was going all “then... then...”
when he knew perfectly well how the exponential progression would
work, it was just the sheer moral horror of it that was blowing his mind.
And what if someone had invented a spell like that to talk to cows?
What if there were Poultrymouths?
Or for that matter...
Harry froze in sudden realization just as the forkful of carrots was
about to enter his mouth.
That couldn’t, couldn’t possibly be true, surely no wizard would be stupid
enough to do that...
And Harry knew, with a dreadful sinking feeling, that of course they
would be that stupid. Salazar Slytherin had probably never considered
the moral implications of snake intelligence for even one second, just
like it hadn’t ever occurred to Salazar that Muggleborns were intelligent
enough to deserve personhood rights. Most people just didn’t see moral
issues at all unless someone else was pointing them out...
“Harry?” said Terry from beside him, sounding like he was afraid he
would regret asking. “Why are you staring at your fork like that?”
“I’m starting to think magic should be illegal,” said Harry. “By the
way, have you ever heard any stories about wizards who could speak
with plants?”

**
*
*

796 *

**
*

UTILITARIAN PRIORITIES

*
*

*

Terry hadn’t heard of anything like that.
Neither had any seventh-year Ravenclaws that Harry had asked.
And now Harry had returned to his place, but not yet sat down
again, staring at his plate of vegetables with a forlorn expression. He
was getting hungrier, and later in the day he would be visiting Mary’s
Place for one of their incredibly tasty dishes... Harry was ﬁnding himself
sorely tempted to just revert back to yesterday’s eating habits and be
done with it.
You’ve got to eat something, said his inner Slytherin. And it’s not all
that much more likely that anyone sneezed self-awareness onto poultry than
onto plants, so as long as you’re eating food of questionable sentience either
way, why not eat the delicious deep-fried Diracawl slices?
I’m not quite sure that’s valid utilitarian logic, there—
Oh, you want utilitarian logic? One serving of utilitarian logic coming up: Even in the unlikely chance that some moron did manage to confer
sentience on chickens, it’s your research that stands the best chance of discovering the fact and doing something about it. If you can complete your work
even slightly faster by not messing around with your diet, then, counterintuitive as it may seem, the best thing you can do to save the greatest number of
possibly-sentient who-knows-whats is not wasting time on wild guesses about
what might be intelligent. It’s not like the house elves haven’t prepared the
food already, regardless of what you take onto your plate.
Harry considered this for a moment. It was a rather seductive line
of reasoning—
Good! said Slytherin. I’m glad you see now that the most moral thing
to do is to sacriﬁce the lives of sentient beings for your own convenience, to
feed your dreadful appetites, for the sick pleasure of ripping them apart with
your teeth—
What? Harry thought indignantly. Which side are you on here?
His inner Slytherin’s mental voice was grim. You too will someday
embrace the doctrine... that the end justiﬁes the meats. This was followed
by some mental snickering.
Ever since Harry had started worrying that plants might also be sen-

*

797 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

tient, his non-Ravenclaw components had been having trouble taking his
moral caution seriously. Huﬄepuﬀ was shouting Cannibalism! every
time Harry tried to think about any food item whatsoever, and Gryfﬁndor would visualize it screaming while he ate it, even if it was, say, a
sandwich—
Cannibalism!
Aiiieeee don’t eat me—
Ignore the screams, eat it anyway! It’s a safe place to compromise your
ethics in the service of higher goals, everyone else thinks it’s okay to eat sandwiches so you can’t use your usual rationalization about a small probability
of a large downside if you get caught—
Harry gave a mental sigh, and thought, Just so long as you’re okay with
us being eaten by giant monsters that didn’t do enough research into whether
we were sentient.
I’m okay with that, said Slytherin. Is everyone else okay with that?
(Internal mental nods.) Great, can we go back to deep-fried Diracawl slices
now?
Not until I’ve done some more research into what’s sentient and what
isn’t. Now shut up. And Harry turned ﬁrmly away from his plate full of
oh-so-tempting vegetables to head toward the library—
Just eat the students, said Huﬄepuﬀ. There’s no doubt about whether
they’re sentient.
You know you want to, said Gryﬃndor. I bet the young ones are the
tastiest.
Harry was starting to wonder if the Dementor had somehow damaged their imaginary personalities.

**
*
“Honestly,” said Hermione. The young girl’s voice sounded a little acerbic as her gaze scanned the bookshelves of the Herbology stacks in the
Hogwarts library. Harry had left her a message asking if she could come
to the library after she’d ﬁnished breakfast, which Harry had skipped;
but then when Harry had introduced the day’s topic she’d seemed a bit
*

798 *

**
*

UTILITARIAN PRIORITIES

*
*

*

nonplussed. “You know your problem, Harry? You’ve got no sense of
priorities. An idea gets into your head and you just go running straight
oﬀ after it.”
“I’ve got a great sense of priorities,” said Harry. His hand reached out
and grabbed Vegetable Cunning by Casey McNamara, and began to ﬂip
through the starting pages, searching for the table of contents. “That’s
why I want to ﬁnd out whether plants can talk before I eat my carrots.”
“Don’t you think that maybe the two of us have more important
things to worry about?”
You sound just like Draco, Harry thought, but of course didn’t say out
loud. Out loud he said, “What could possibly be more important than
plants turning out to be sentient?”
There was a pregnant silence from beside him, as Harry’s eyes went
down the table of contents. There was indeed a chapter on Plant Language, causing Harry’s heart to skip a beat; and then his hands began to
rapidly turn the pages, heading for the appropriate page number.
“There are days,” said Hermione Granger, “when I really, truly, have
absolutely no idea what goes on inside that head of yours.”
“Look, it’s a question of multiplication, okay? There’s a lot of plants
in the world, if they’re not sentient then they’re not important, but if
plants are people than they’ve got more moral weight than all the human
beings in the world put together. Now, of course your brain doesn’t
realize that on an intuitive level, but that’s because the brain can’t multiply. Like if you ask three separate groups of Canadian households how
much they’ll pay to save two thousand, twenty thousand, or two hundred thousand birds from dying in oil ponds, the three groups will respectively state that they’re willing to pay seventy-eight, eighty-eight,
and eighty dollars. No diﬀerence, in other words. It’s called scope insensitivity. Your brain imagines a single bird struggling in an oil pond,
and that image creates some amount of emotion that determines your
willingness to pay. But no one can visualize even two thousand of anything, so the quantity just gets thrown straight out the window. Now
try to correct that bias with respect to a hundred trillion sentient blades
of grass, and you’ll realize that this could be thousands of times more important than we used to think the whole human species was... oh thank
*

799 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Azathoth, this says it’s just a few magical plants that can talk and they
speak regular human language out loud, not that there’s a spell you can
use to talk with any plant—”
“Ron came to me at breakfast yesterday morning,” Hermione said.
Now her voice sounded a little quiet, a little sad, maybe even a little
scared. “He said he’d been dreadfully shocked to see me kiss you. That
what you said while you were Demented should’ve shown me how much
evil you were hiding inside. And that if I was going to be a follower of a
Dark Wizard, then he wasn’t sure he wanted to be in my army anymore.”
Harry’s hands had stopped turning pages. It seemed that Harry’s
brain, for all its abstract knowledge, was still incapable of appreciating
scope on any real emotional level, because it had just forcibly redirected
his attention away from trillions of possibly-sentient blades of grass who
might be suﬀering or dying even as they spoke, and toward the life of a
single human being who happened to be nearer and dearer.
“Ron is the world’s most gigantic prat,” Harry said. “They won’t be
printing that in the newspaper anytime soon, because it’s not news. So
after you ﬁred him, how many of his arms and legs did you break?”
“I tried to tell him it wasn’t like that,” Hermione went on in the same
quiet voice. “I tried to tell him you weren’t like that, and that it wasn’t
like that between the two of us, but it just seemed to make him even
more... more like he was.”
“Well, yes,” Harry said. He was surprised that he wasn’t feeling angrier at Captain Weasley, but his concern for Hermione seemed to be
overriding that, for now. “The more you try to justify yourself to people like that, the more it acknowledges that they have the right to question you. It shows you think they get to be your inquisitor, and once
you grant someone that sort of power over you, they just push more
and more.” This was one of Draco Malfoy’s lessons which Harry had
thought was actually pretty smart: people who tried to defend themselves got questioned over every little point and could never satisfy their
interrogators; but if you made it clear from the start that you were a
celebrity and above social conventions, people’s minds wouldn’t bother
tracking most violations. “That’s why when Ron came over to me as I
was sitting down at the Ravenclaw table, and told me to stay away from
* 800 *

**
*

UTILITARIAN PRIORITIES

*
*

*

you, I held my hand out over the ﬂoor and said, ‘You see how high I’m
holding my hand? Your intelligence has to be at least this high to talk to
me.’ Then he accused me of, quote, sucking you into the darkness, unquote, so I pursed my lips and went schluuuuurp, and after that his mouth
was still making those talking noises so I put up a Quieting Charm. I
don’t think he’ll be trying his lectures on me again.”
“I understand why you did that,” Hermione said, her voice tight, “I
wanted to tell him oﬀ too, but I really wish you hadn’t, it will make
things harder for me, Harry!”
Harry looked up from Vegetable Cunning again, he wasn’t getting
any reading done at this rate; and he saw that Hermione was still reading whatever book she had, not looking up at him. Her hands turned
another page even as he watched.
“I think you’re taking the wrong approach by trying to defend yourself at all,” Harry said. “I really do think that. You are who you are.
You’re friends with whoever you choose. Tell anyone who questions
you to shove it.”
Hermione just shook her head, and turned another page.
“Option two,” Harry said. “Go to Fred and George and tell them to
have a little talk with their wayward brother, those two are genuine good
guys—”
“It’s not just Ron,” Hermione said in almost a whisper. “Lots of
people are saying it, Harry. Even Mandy is giving me worried looks
when she thinks I’m not looking. Isn’t it funny? I keep worrying that
Professor Quirrell is sucking you into the darkness, and now people are
warning me just the same way I try to warn you.”
“Well, yeah,” said Harry. “Doesn’t that reassure you a bit about me
and Professor Quirrell?”
“In a word,” said Hermione, “no.”
There was a silence that lasted long enough for Hermione to turn
another page, and then her voice, in a real whisper this time, “And, and
Padma is going around telling everyone that, that since I couldn’t cast
the P-Patronus Charm, I must only be p-pretending to be n-nice...”
“Padma didn’t even try herself!” Harry said indignantly. “If you were
a Dark Witch who was just pretending, you wouldn’t have tried in front
*

801 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

of everyone, do they think you’re stupid?”
Hermione smiled a little, and blinked a few times.
“Hey, I have to worry about actually going evil. Here the worst case
scenario is that people think you’re more evil than you really are. Is that
going to kill you? I mean, is it all that bad?”
The young girl nodded, her face screwed up tight.
“Look, Hermione... if you worry that much about what other people think, if you’re unhappy whenever other people don’t picture you
exactly the same way you picture yourself, that’s already dooming yourself to always be unhappy. No one ever thinks of us just the same way
we think of ourselves.”
“I don’t know how to explain to you,” Hermione said in a sad soft
voice. “I’m not sure it’s something you could ever understand, Harry.
All I can think of to say is, how would you feel if I thought you were
evil?”
“Um...” Harry visualized it. “Yeah, that would hurt. A lot. But
you’re a good person who thinks about that sort of thing intelligently,
you’ve earned that power over me, it would mean something if you
thought I’d gone wrong. I can’t think of a single other student, besides
you, whose opinion I’d care about the same way—”
“You can live like that,” whispered Hermione Granger. “I can’t.”
The girl had gone through another three pages in silence, and Harry
had returned his eyes to his own book and was trying to regain his focus, when Hermione ﬁnally said, in a small voice, “Are you really sure I
mustn’t know how to cast the Patronus Charm?”
“I...” Harry had to swallow a sudden lump in his throat. He suddenly saw himself not knowing why the Patronus Charm didn’t work
for him, not being able to show Draco, just being told that there was a
reason, and nothing more. “Hermione, your Patronus would shine with
the same light but it wouldn’t be normal, it wouldn’t look like people
think Patronuses should look, anyone who saw it would know there was
something strange going on. Even if I told you the secret you couldn’t
demonstrate to anyone, unless you made them face the other way so they
could only see the light, and... and the most important part of any secret
is the knowledge that a secret exists, you could only show one or two
*

802 *

**
*

UTILITARIAN PRIORITIES

*
*

*

friends if you swore them to secrecy...” Harry’s voice trailed oﬀ helplessly.
“I’ll take it.” Her voice was still small.
It was very hard not to just blurt out the secret, right there in the
library.
“I, I shouldn’t, I really shouldn’t, it’s dangerous, Hermione, it could
do a lot of harm if that secret got out! Haven’t you heard the saying,
three can keep a secret if two are dead? That telling just your closest
friends is the same as telling everyone, because you’re not just trusting
them, you’re trusting everyone they trust? It’s too important, too much
of a risk, it’s not the sort of decision that should be made for the sake of
ﬁxing someone’s reputation at school!”
“Okay,” Hermione said. She closed the book and put it back on the
shelf. “I can’t concentrate right now, Harry, I’m sorry.”
“If there’s anything else I can do—”
“Be nicer to everyone.”
The girl didn’t look back as she walked out of the stacks, which might
have been a good thing, because the boy was frozen in place, unmoving.
After a while, the boy started turning pages again.

*

803 *

CHAPTER

FORT Y-NINE

PRIOR INFORMATION
boy waits at a small clearing at the edge of the non-forbidden forest,
beside a dirt trail that runs back to the gates of Hogwarts in one
direction, and oﬀ into the distance in another. There is a carriage nearby,
and the boy is standing well away from it, looking at it, his eyes seldom
wavering from its direction.
In the distance, a ﬁgure is approaching along the dirt path: A man
wearing professorial robes, trudging slowly with his shoulders slumped
low, his formal shoes kicking up small clouds of dust as he walks.
Half a minute later, the boy darts another quick glance before returning to his surveillance; and this glimpse shows that the man’s shoulders
have straightened, his face unslackened, and that his shoes are now walking lightly across the dirt, leaving not a trace of dust in the air behind.
“Hello, Professor Quirrell,” Harry said without letting his eyes move
again from the direction of their carriage.
“Salutations,” said the calm voice of Professor Quirrell. “You seem to
be keeping your distance, Mr. Potter. I don’t suppose you see something
odd about our conveyance?”
“Odd?” Harry echoed. “Why no, I can’t say I see anything odd.
There seem to be even numbers of everything. Four seats, four wheels,
two huge skeletal winged horses...”
A skin-wrapped skull turned to look at him and ﬂashed teeth, solid
and white in that black cavernous mouth, as though to indicate that it
was just about as fond of him as he was of it. The other black leathery
horse-skeleton tossed its head like it was whickering, but there was no
sound.

A

*

805 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-NINE

*
*

*

“They are Thestrals, and they have always drawn the carriage,” Professor Quirrell said, sounding quite undisturbed as he climbed into the
front bench of the carriage, sitting down as far to the right as possible.
“They are visible only to those who have seen death and comprehended
it, a useful defense against most animal predators. Hm. I suppose that
the ﬁrst time you went in front of the Dementor, your worst memory
proved to be the night of your encounter with He-Who-Must-Not-BeNamed?”
Harry nodded grimly. It was the right guess, even if for the wrong
reasons. Those who have seen Death...
“Did you recall anything of interest, thereby?”
“Yes,” Harry said, “I did,” only that and nothing more, for he was
not ready as yet to make accusations.
The Defense Professor smiled one of his dry smiles, and beckoned
with an impatient ﬁnger.
Harry closed the distance and climbed into the carriage, wincing.
The sense of doom had grown signiﬁcantly stronger after the day of the
Dementor, even though it had been slowly weakening before then. The
greatest distance that the carriage allowed him from Professor Quirrell
no longer seemed like nearly far enough.
Then the skeletal horses trotted forward and the carriage started in
motion, taking them toward the outer bounds of Hogwarts. As it did,
Professor Quirrell slumped back down into zombie-mode, and the sense
of doom retreated, though it still hovered at the edge of Harry’s perceptions, unignorable...
The forest scrolled by as the carriage rolled along, the trees moving
past at a speed that seemed positively glacial by comparison to broomsticks or even cars. There was something oddly relaxing, Harry thought,
about traveling that slowly. It had certainly relaxed the Defense Professor, who was slumped over with a small stream of drool coming out of
his slack mouth and puddling on his robes.
Harry still hadn’t decided what he was allowed to eat for lunch.
His library research hadn’t turned up any sign of wizards speaking
to nonmagical plants. Or any other nonmagical animals besides snakes,
although Spell and Speak by Paul Breedlove had recounted the probably*

806 *

**
*

PRIOR INFORMATION

*
*

*

mythical tale of a sorceress called the Lady of Flying Squirrels.
What Harry wanted to do was ask Professor Quirrell. The problem
was that Professor Quirrell was too smart. Judging by what Draco had
said, the Heir of Slytherin business was a major bombshell, and Harry
wasn’t sure he wanted anyone else to know. And the instant Harry
asked about Parseltongue, Professor Quirrell would ﬁx him with those
pale blue eyes and say, ‘I see, Mr. Potter, so you taught Mr. Malfoy the
Patronus Charm and accidentally spoke to his snake.’
It wouldn’t matter that it shouldn’t be enough evidence to locate the
true explanation as a hypothesis, let alone overcome its burden of prior
improbability. Somehow the Defense Professor would deduce it anyway.
There were times when Harry suspected that Professor Quirrell had way
more background information than he was telling, his priors were simply too good. Sometimes he got his amazing deductions right even when
his reasons were wrong. The problem was that Harry couldn’t see how
Professor Quirrell could’ve snuck in an extra clue about half the stuﬀ
he guessed. Just once Harry would have liked to make some sort of incredible deduction from something Professor Quirrell said which would
catch him completely oﬀ guard.

**
*
“I shall have a bowl of green lentil soup, with soy sauce,” Professor Quirrell said to the waitress. “And for Mr. Potter, a plate of Tenorman’s
family chili.”
Harry hesitated in sudden dismay. He’d resolved to stick to vegetarian dishes for the moment, but he’d forgotten in his deliberations that
Professor Quirrell did the actual ordering —and it would be awkward if
he protested now—
The waitress bowed to them, and turned to go—
“Erm, excuse me, any meat in that from snakes or ﬂying squirrels?”
The waitress didn’t so much as blink an eye, only turned back to
Harry, shook her head, bowed politely to him again, and resumed her
walk toward the door.
*

807 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-NINE

*
*

*

(The other parts of Harry were snickering at him. Gryﬃndor was
making sardonic comments about how a little social discomfort was
enough to get him to resort to Cannibalism! (shouted by Huﬄepuﬀ),
and Slytherin was remarking on how nice it was that Harry’s ethics were
ﬂexible when it came to important goals like maintaining his relationship with Professor Quirrell.)
After the waitress had closed the door behind her, Professor Quirrell
waved a hand to slide home the locking bar, spoke the usual four Charms
to ensure privacy, and then said, “An interesting question, Mr. Potter. I
wonder why you asked it?”
Harry kept his face steady. “I was looking up some facts about the
Patronus Charm earlier,” he said. “According to The Patronus Charm:
Wizards Who Could and Couldn’t, it turns out that Godric couldn’t and
Salazar could. I was surprised, so I looked up the reference, in Four Lives
of Power. And then I discovered that Salazar Slytherin could supposedly talk to snakes.” (Temporal sequence wasn’t the same as causation,
it wasn’t Harry’s fault if Professor Quirrell missed that.) “Further research turned up an old story about a mother goddess type who could
talk to ﬂying squirrels. I was a bit worried about the prospect of eating
something that could talk.”
And Harry took a casual sip of his water—
—just as Professor Quirrell said, “Mr. Potter, would I be correct in
guessing that you are also a Parselmouth?”
When Harry was done coughing, he set his glass of water back down
on the table, ﬁxed his gaze on Professor Quirrell’s chin rather than looking him in the eyes, and said, “So you are able to perform Legilimency
through my Occlumency barriers, then.”
Professor Quirrell was grinning widely. “I shall take that as a compliment, Mr. Potter, but no.”
“I’m not buying this anymore,” Harry said. “There’s no way you
came to that conclusion based on that evidence.”
“Of course not,” Professor Quirrell said equably. “I had planned to
ask you that question today in any case, and simply chose an opportune
moment. I have suspected since December, in fact—”
“December?” said Harry. “I found out yesterday!”
* 808 *

**
*

PRIOR INFORMATION

*
*

*

“Ah, so you did not realize the Sorting Hat’s message to you was in
Parseltongue?”
The Defense Professor had timed it exactly right the second time,
too, just as Harry was taking a gulp of water to clear out his throat from
the ﬁrst coughing ﬁt.
Harry hadn’t realized, not until just now. Of course it was obvious
the instant Pofessor Quirrell said it. Right, Professor McGonagall had
even told him not to talk to snakes where anyone could see him, but
he’d thought she’d meant not to be seen talking to any statues or architectural features in Hogwarts that looked like snakes. Double illusion
of transparency, he’d thought he’d understood her, she’d thought he’d
understood her—but how the hell—
“So,” Harry said, “you performed Legilimency on me during my ﬁrst
Defense class, to ﬁnd out what happened with the Sorting Hat—”
“Then I would not have found out in December.” Professor Quirell
leaned back, smiling. “This is not a puzzle you can solve on your own,
Mr. Potter, so I will reveal the answer. Over the winter holiday, I was
alerted to the fact that the Headmaster had ﬁled a request for a closed
judicial panel to review the case of one Mr. Rubeus Hagrid, whom you
know as the Keeper of Keys and Grounds at Hogwarts, and who was
accused of the murder of Abigail Myrtle in 1943.”
“Oh, of course,” said Harry, “that makes it downright obvious that
I’m a Parselmouth. Professor, what the sweet slithering snakes—”
“The other suspect for that murder was Slytherin’s Monster, the legendary inhabitant of Slytherin’s Chamber of Secrets. Which is why
certain sources alerted me to the fact, and why it caught my attention
suﬃciently that I spent a good deal of bribe money to learn the details of the case. Now in point of fact, Mr. Potter, Mr. Hagrid is innocent. Ridiculously obviously innocent. He is the most blatantly innocent bystander to be convicted by the magical British legal system
since Grindelwald’s Confunding of Neville Chamberlain was pinned on
Amanda Knox. Headmaster Dippet prompted a student puppet to accuse Mr. Hagrid because Dippet needed a scapegoat to take the blame
for the death of Miss Myrtle, and our marvelous justice system agreed
that this was plausible enough to warrant Mr. Hagrid’s expulsion and
* 809 *

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-NINE

*
*

*

the snapping of his wand. Our current Headmaster needs merely provide some new item of evidence signiﬁcant enough to reconvene the case;
and with Dumbledore applying pressure instead of Dippet, the result is
a foregone conclusion. Lucius Malfoy has no particular reason to fear
Mr. Hagrid’s vindication; thus Lucius Malfoy will only resist to the extent that he can do so costlessly in order to impose costs on Dumbledore,
and Dumbledore is clearly willing to prosecute the case regardless.”
Professor Quirrell took a sip of his water. “But I digress. The new evidence that the Headmaster promises to provide is to exhibit a previously
undetected spell on the Sorting Hat, which, the Headmaster asserts, he
has personally determined to respond only to Slytherins who are also
Parselmouths. The Headmaster further argues that this favors the interpretation that the Chamber of Secrets was indeed opened in 1943,
approximately the right time frame for He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named,
a known Parselmouth, to have attended Hogwarts. It is a rather questionable logic, but a judicial panel may rule that it swings the case far
enough to bring Mr. Hagrid’s guilt into doubt, if they can manage to
keep a straight face as they say it. And now we come to the key question: how did the Headmaster discover this hidden spell on the Sorting
Hat?”
Professor Quirrell was smiling thinly now. “Well now, let us suppose
that there was a Parselmouth in this year’s crop of students, a potential
Heir of Slytherin. You must admit, Mr. Potter, that you stand out as
a possibility whenever extraordinary people are considered. And if I
then further ask myself which new Slytherin would be most likely to
have his mental privacy invaded by the Headmaster, speciﬁcally hunting
the memories of his Sorting, why, you stand out even more.” The smile
vanished. “So you see, Mr. Potter, it was not I who invaded your mind,
though I will not ask you to apologize. It is not your fault that you
believed Dumbledore’s protestations of respecting your mental privacy.”
“My sincere apologies,” Harry said, keeping his face expressionless.
The rigid control was a confession in its own right, as was the sweat beading his forehead; but he didn’t think the Defense Professor would take
any evidence from that. Professor Quirrell would just think Harry was
nervous at having been discovered as the Heir of Slytherin. Rather than
*

810 *

**
*

PRIOR INFORMATION

*
*

*

being nervous that Professor Quirrell might realize that Harry had deliberately betrayed Slytherin’s secret... which itself was no longer seeming
like such a smart move.
“So, Mr. Potter. Any progress on ﬁnding the Chamber of Secrets?”
No, thought Harry. But to maintain plausible deniability, you
needed a general policy of sometimes evading questions even when you
had nothing to hide... “With respect, Professor Quirrell, if I had made
such progress, it is not quite obvious to me that I should tell you about
it.”
Professor Quirrell sipped from his own waterglass again. “Well then,
Mr. Potter, I shall freely tell you what I know or suspect. First, I believe
the Chamber of Secrets is real, as is Slytherin’s Monster. Miss Myrtle’s death was not discovered until hours after her demise, even though
the wards should have alerted the Headmaster instantly. Therefore her
murder was performed either by Headmaster Dippet, which is unlikely,
or by some entity which Salazar Slytherin keyed into his wards at a
higher level than the Headmaster himself. Second, I suspect that contrary to popular legend, the purpose of Slytherin’s Monster was not to
rid Hogwarts of Muggleborns. Unless Slytherin’s Monster were powerful enough to defeat the Headmaster of Hogwarts and all the teachers, it
could not triumph by force. Multiple murders in secrecy would result
in the school’s closure, as nearly happened in 1943, or in the placing of
new wards. So why Slytherin’s Monster, Mr. Potter? What true purpose
does it serve?”
“Ah...” Harry dropped his gaze to his waterglass and tried to think.
“To kill anyone who got into the Chamber and didn’t belong there—”
“A monster powerful enough to defeat a team of wizards that had
broken past the best wards Salazar could place on his Chamber? Unlikely.”
Harry was feeling a bit pressured now. “Well, it’s called the Chamber
of Secrets, so maybe the Monster has a secret, or is a secret?” For that
matter, just what sort of secrets were in the Chamber of Secrets in the
ﬁrst place? Harry hadn’t done a lot of research on the subject, in part
because he’d gotten the impression that nobody knew anything—
Professor Quirrell was smiling. “Why not just write the secret
*

811

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-NINE

*
*

*

down?”
“Ahhh...” said Harry. “Because if the Monster spoke Parseltongue,
that would ensure that only a true descendant of Slytherin could hear
the secret?”
“Easy enough to key the wards on the Chamber to a phrase spoken
in Parseltongue. Why go to the trouble of creating Slytherin’s Monster?
It cannot have been easy to create a creature with a lifespan of centuries.
Come, Mr. Potter, it should be obvious; what are the secrets that can be
told from one living mind to another, but never written down?”
Harry saw it then, with a burst of adrenaline that started his heart
racing, his breath coming faster. “Oh.”
Salazar Slytherin had been very cunning indeed. Cunning enough to
come up with a way to bypass the Interdict of Merlin.
Powerful wizardries couldn’t be transmitted through books or
ghosts, but if you could create a long-lived enough sentient creature with
a good enough memory—
“It seems very probable to me,” said Professor Quirrell, “that HeWho-Must-Not-Be-Named began his climb to power with secrets obtained from Slytherin’s Monster. That Salazar’s lost knowledge is the
source of You-Know-Who’s extraordinarily powerful wizardry. Hence
my interest in the Chamber of Secrets and the case of Mr. Hagrid.”
“I see,” Harry said. And if he, Harry, could ﬁnd Salazar’s Chamber of Secrets... then all of the lost knowledge that Lord Voldemort had
obtained would be his as well.
Yes. That was just how the story should go.
Add in Harry’s superior intelligence and some original magical research and some Muggle rocket launchers, and the resulting ﬁght would
be completely one-sided, which was exactly how Harry wanted it.
Harry was grinning now, a very evil grin. New priority: Find everything in Hogwarts that looks remotely like a snake and try speaking to
it. Starting with everything you’ve already tried, only this time be sure to
use Parseltongue instead of English—get Draco to let you into the Slytherin
dorms—
“Don’t become too excited, Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell. His
own face had become expressionless, now. “You must continue thinking.
*

812

*

**
*

PRIOR INFORMATION

*
*

*

What were the Dark Lord’s parting words to Slytherin’s Monster?”
“What?” Harry said. “How could either of us possibly know that?”
“Visualize the scene, Mr. Potter. Let your imagination ﬁll in the details. Slytherin’s Monster—probably some great serpent, so that only a
Parselmouth may speak to it—has ﬁnished imparting all of the knowledge it possesses to He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named. It conveys to him
Salazar’s ﬁnal benediction, and warns him that the Chamber of Secrets
must now remain closed until the next descendant of Salazar should
prove cunning enough to open it. And he who will become the Dark
Lord nods, and says to it—”
“Avada Kedavra,” said Harry, suddenly feeling sick to his stomach.
“Rule Twelve,” Professor Quirrell said quietly. “Never leave the
source of your power lying around where someone else can ﬁnd it.”
Harry’s gaze dropped to the tablecloth, which had decorated itself
in a mournful pattern of black ﬂowers and shadows. Somehow that
seemed... too sad to be imagined, Slytherin’s great snake had only wanted
to help Lord Voldemort, and Lord Voldemort had just... there was something unbearably sorrowful about it, what sort of person would do that
to a being who’d oﬀered them nothing but friendship... “Do you think
the Dark Lord would have—”
“Yes,” Professor Quirrell said ﬂatly. “He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named
left quite a trail of bodies behind him, Mr. Potter; I doubt he would
have omitted that one. If there were any artifacts left there that could be
moved, the Dark Lord would have taken those with him as well. There
might still be something worth seeing in the Chamber of Secrets, and to
ﬁnd it would prove yourself the true Heir of Slytherin. But do not raise
your hopes too high. I suspect that all you will ﬁnd is the remains of
Slytherin’s Monster resting quietly in its grave.”
They sat in silence for a while.
“I could be wrong,” said Professor Quirrell. “In the end it is only a
guess. But I did wish to warn you, Mr. Potter, so that you would not be
too sorely disappointed.”
Harry nodded shortly.
“One might even regret your infant self’s victory,” said Professor
Quirrell. His smile twisted. “If only You-Know-Who had lived, you
*

813

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-NINE

*
*

*

might have persuaded him to teach you some of the knowledge that
would have been your heritage, from one Heir of Slytherin to another.”
The smile twisted further, as though to mock the obvious impossibility,
even given the premise.
Note to self, thought Harry, with a slight chill and an edge of anger,
make sure to extract my heritage out of the Dark Lord’s mind, one way or
another.
There was another silence. Professor Quirrell was looking at Harry
as though waiting for him to ask something.
“Well,” said Harry, “so long as we’re on the topic, can I ask how you
think the whole Parselmouth business actually—”
There came a knock at the door, then. Professor Quirrell raised a
cautionary ﬁnger, then opened the door with a wave. The waitress entered, balancing a huge platter with their meals as though the whole
assembly weighed nothing (which was in fact probably the case). She
gave Professor Quirrell his bowl of green soup, and a glass of his usual
Chianti; and set down before Harry a plate of small meat strips smothered in a heavy-looking sauce, plus a glass of his accustomed treacle soda.
Then she bowed, managing to make it seem like sincere respect rather
than perfunctory acknowledgment, and departed.
When she was gone, Professor Quirrell held up a ﬁnger for silence
again, and drew his wand.
And then Professor Quirrell began performing a certain series of
incantations that Harry recognized, making him take a sharp breath.
It was the series and ordering that Mr. Bester had used, the full set of
twenty-seven spells that you would perform before discussing anything
of truly great import.
If the discussion of the Chamber of Secrets hadn’t counted as important—
When Professor Quirrell was done—he’d performed thirty spells,
three of which Harry hadn’t heard before—the Defense Professor said,
“Now we shall not be interrupted for a time. Can you keep a secret,
Mr. Potter?”
Harry nodded.
“A serious secret, Mr. Potter,” Professor Quirrell said. His eyes were
*

814

*

**
*

PRIOR INFORMATION

*
*

*

intent, his face grave. “One which could potentially send me to Azkaban. Think about it before you reply.”
For a moment Harry didn’t even see why the question should be
hard, given his growing collection of secrets. Then—
If this secret could send Professor Quirrell to Azkaban, that means he’s
done something illegal...
Harry’s brain performed a few calculations. Whatever the secret,
Professor Quirrell did not think his illegal act would reﬂect badly on him
in Harry’s eyes. There was no advantage to be gained from not hearing
it. And if it did reveal something wrong with Professor Quirrell, then it
was very much to Harry’s advantage to know it, even if he had promised
not to tell anyone.
“I never had very much respect for authority,” Harry said. “Legal
and governmental authority included. I will keep your secret.”
Harry didn’t bother asking whether the revelation was worth the
danger it would pose to Professor Quirrell. The Defense Professor
wasn’t stupid.
“Then I must test whether you are truly a descendant of Salazar,”
said Professor Quirrell, and stood up from his chair. Harry, prompted
more by reﬂex and instinct than calculation, shoved himself up out of
his own chair as well.
There was a blur, a shift, a sudden motion.
Harry aborted his panicked backward leap halfway through, leaving
him windmilling his arms and trying not to fall over, a frantic ﬂush of
adrenaline running through him.
At the other end of the room swayed a snake a meter high, bright
green and intricately banded in white and blue. Harry didn’t know
enough snakelore to recognize it, but he knew that ‘brightly colored’
meant ‘poisonous’.
The constant sense of doom had diminished, ironically enough, after
the Defense Professor of Hogwarts had turned into a venomous snake.
Harry swallowed hard and said, “Greetings—ah, hssss, no, ah, greetingss.”
“Sso,” hissed the snake. “You sspeak, I hear. I sspeak, you hear?”
“Yess, I hear,” hissed Harry. “You are an Animaguss?”
*

815

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-NINE

*
*

*

“Obvioussly,” hissed the snake. “Thirty-sseven ruless, number thirtyfour: Become Animaguss. All ssensible people do, if can. Thuss, very rare.”
The snake’s eyes were ﬂat surfaces ensconced within dark pits, sharp
black pupils in dark gray ﬁelds. “This iss mosst ssecure way to sspeak. You
ssee? No otherss undersstand uss.”
“Even if they are ssnake Animagi?”
“Not unlesss heir of Sslytherin willss.” The snake gave a series of short
hisses which Harry’s brain translated as sardonic laughter. “Sslytherin
not sstupid. Ssnake Animaguss not ssame as Parsselmouth. Would be huge
ﬂaw in sscheme.”
Well that deﬁnitely argued that Parseltongue was personal magic, not
snakes being sentient beings with a learnable language—
“I am not regisstered,” hissed the snake. The dark pits of its eyes stared
at Harry. “Animaguss musst be regisstered. Penalty is two yearss imprissonment. Will you keep my ssecret, boy?”
“Yess,” hissed Harry. “Would never break promisse.”
The snake seemed to hold still, as though in shock, and then began
to sway again. “We come here next in sseven dayss. Bring cloak to passs
unsseen, bring hourglasss to move through time—”
“You know?” hissed Harry in shock. “How—”
Again the series of short quick hisses that translated as sardonic
laughter. “You arrive in my ﬁrsst classs while sstill in other classs, sstrike
down enemy with pie, two ballss of memory—”
“Never mind,” hissed Harry. “Sstupid question, forgot you were ssmart.”
“Foolissh thing to forget,” said the snake, but the hiss did not seem
oﬀended.
“Hourglasss is resstricted,” Harry said. “Cannot usse until ninth hour.”
The snake twitched its head, a snakish nod. “Many resstrictionss.
Locked to your usse only, cannot be sstolen. Cannot transsport other humanss. But ssnake carried in pouch, I ssuspect will go with. Think posssible to hold hourglasss motionlesss within sshell, without dissturbing wardss,
while you turn sshell around it. We will tesst in sseven dayss. Will not sspeak of planss beyond thiss. You ssay nothing, to no one. Give no ssign of
expectancy, none. Undersstand?”
*

816

*

**
*

PRIOR INFORMATION

*
*

*

Harry nodded.
“Ansswer in sspeech.”
“Yess.”
“Will do as I ssaid?”
“Yess. But,” Harry gave a wobbling rasp that was how his mind had
translated a hesitant ‘Ahhh’ into snakish, “I do not promisse to do whatever
thiss iss, you have not ssaid—”
The snake performed a shiver that Harry’s mind translated as a severe
glare. “Of coursse not. Will disscusss sspeciﬁcss at next meeting.”
The blur and motion reversed itself, and Professor Quirrell was
standing there once more. For a moment the Defense Professor himself seemed to sway, as the snake had swayed, and his eyes seemed cold
and ﬂat; and then his shoulders straightened and he was human once
more.
And the aura of doom had returned.
Professor Quirrell’s chair scooted back for him, and he sat down in
it. “No sense in letting this go to waste,” Professor Quirrell said as he
picked up his spoon, “though at the moment I would much prefer a
live mouse. One can never quite disentangle the mind from the body it
wears, you see...”
Harry slowly took his seat and began eating.

**
*
“So the line of Salazar did not die with You-Know-Who after all,” said
Professor Quirrell after a time. “It would seem that rumors have already
begun to spread, among our ﬁne student body, that you are Dark; I
wonder what they would think, if they knew that.”
“Or if they knew that I had destroyed a Dementor,” Harry said, and
shrugged. “I ﬁgure all the fuss will blow over over the next time I do
something interesting. Hermione is having trouble, though, and I was
wondering if you might have any suggestions for her.”
*

817

*

**
*

CHAPTER FORT Y-NINE

*
*

*

The Defense Professor ate several spoonfuls of soup in silence, then;
and when he spoke again, his voice was oddly ﬂat. “You really care about
that girl.”
“Yes,” Harry said quietly.
“I suppose that is why she was able to bring you out of your Dementation?”
“More or less,” Harry said. The statement was true in a way, just not
exact; it was not that his Demented self had cared, but that it had been
confused.
“I did not have any friends like that when I was young.” Still the same
emotionless voice. “What would have become of you, I wonder, if you
had been alone?”
Harry shivered before he could stop himself.
“You must be feeling grateful to her.”
Harry just nodded. Not quite exact, but true.
“Then here is what I might have done at your age, if there had been
anyone to do it for—”

*

818 *

CHAPTER

FIFT Y

SELF CENTEREDNESS
adma Patil had ﬁnished her dinner a little late, getting on toward
seven-thirty, and was now striding quickly out of the Great Hall
on her way to the Ravenclaw dorm and the study rooms. Gossiping
was fun and destroying Granger’s reputation was more fun, but it could
distract from schoolwork. She’d put oﬀ a six-inch essay on lomillialor
wood due in next morning’s Herbology class, and she needed to ﬁnish
it tonight.
It was while she was passing through a long, twisting, narrow stone
corridor that the whisper came, sounding like it was coming from right
behind her.
“Padma Patil...”
She spun around quick as lightning, her wand already snatched up
from a pocket of her robes and leaping into her hands, if Harry Potter
thought he could sneak up on and scare her that easily—
There was no one there.
Instantly Padma spun around and looked in the other direction, if it
had been a Ventriloquism Charm—
There was no one there, either.
The whispering sigh came again, soft and dangerous with a slight
hissing undertone.
“Padma Patil, Slytherin girl...”
“Harry Potter, Slytherin boy,” she said out loud.
She’d fought Potter and his Chaos Legion a dozen times over, and
she knew that this was Harry Potter doing this somehow...

P

*

819

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y

*
*

*

...even though the Ventriloquism Charm was only line-of-sight, and
in the winding corridor, she could easily see all the way to the nearest
twist both forward and backward, and there was no one there...
...it didn’t matter. She knew her enemy.
There was a whispery chuckle, now coming from beside her, and she
spun around and pointed her wand at the whisper and shouted “Luminos!”
The red bolt of light shot out and struck the wall, which lit with a
crimson glow that soon faded.
She hadn’t really expected it to work. Harry Potter couldn’t possibly
be invisible, not really invisible, that was magic most grownups couldn’t
do, and she’d never believed nine-tenths of the stories about him.
The whispery voice laughed again, now on her other side.
“Harry Potter stands on the precipice,” whispered the voice, now
sounding very close to her ear, “he is wavering, but you, you are already
falling, Slytherin girl...”
“The hat never called out Slytherin for my name, Potter!” She backed
up against the wall, so she wouldn’t have to watch behind herself, and
raised her wand in an attack stance.
Again the soft laugh. “Harry Potter has been in the Ravenclaw common room for the last half-hour, helping Kevin Entwhistle and Michael
Corner rehearse Potions recipes. But it matters not. I am here to deliver
a warning to you, Padma Patil, and if you choose to ignore it, that is
your own aﬀair.”
“Fine,” she said coldly. “Go ahead and warn me, Potter, I’m not
afraid of you.”
“Slytherin was a great House, once,” said the whisper; it sounded
sadder, now. “Slytherin was once a House you would have been proud
to choose, Padma Patil. But something turned wrong, something turned
sour; do you know what went awry in Slytherin House, Padma Patil?”
“No, and I don’t care!”
“But you should care,” said the whisper, now sounding like it was
coming from just behind her head where it stood almost pressed against
the wall. “For you are still that girl whom the Sorting Hat oﬀered that
choice. Do you think that just choosing Ravenclaw means that you are
*

820 *

**
*

SELF CENTEREDNESS

*
*

*

not Pansy Parkinson, and will not ever become Pansy Parkinson, no
matter how you conduct yourself otherwise?”
Despite everything, now, small chills of fear were spreading out from
her spine and running over her skin. She’d heard those stories about
Harry Potter too, that he was a secret Legilimens. But she still stood
straight, and she put all the bite she could into her voice when she said,
“The Slytherins went Dark to get power, just like you did, Potter. And I
won’t, not ever.”
“But you’ll spread vicious rumors about an innocent girl,” whispered
the voice, “even though it will not help you attain any of your own
ambitions, and without considering that she has powerful allies who
might take oﬀense. That is is not the proud Slytherin of the old days,
Padma Patil, that is not the pride of Salazar, that is Slytherin gone rotten,
Padma Parkinson not Padma Malfoy...”
She was getting more creeped out than she ever had been in her life,
and the possibility was starting to occur to her that this might really be
a ghost. She hadn’t ever heard that ghosts could hide themselves like
this, but maybe they just didn’t usually do it—not to mention that most
ghosts weren’t this eerie, they were just dead people after all—“Who are
you? The Bloody Baron?”
“When Harry Potter was bullied and beaten,” the voice whispered,
“he commanded all his allies to refrain from vengeance; do you remember that, Padma Patil? For Harry Potter is wavering, but not yet lost; he
is struggling, he knows himself to be in peril. But Hermione Granger
made no such request of her own allies. Harry Potter is angered with
you now, Padma Patil, more angered than he would ever be on his own
behalf... and he has allies of his own.”
A shudder went through her, she knew that it was visible and she
hated herself for it.
“Oh, don’t be afraid,” breathed the voice. “I will not hurt you. For
you see, Padma Patil, Hermione Granger truly is innocent. She does not
stand on the precipice, she is not falling. She did not ask her allies to
refrain from hurting you, because the thought did not even occur to her
as a possibility. And Harry Potter knows very well that if he hurt you
or caused you to be hurt, for Hermione Granger’s sake, then she would
*

821

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y

*
*

*

never speak to him again until the Sun burned low and the last star failed
in the night sky.” The voice was very sad now. “She truly is a kindly girl,
a person such as I could only wish to be...”
“Granger can’t cast the Patronus Charm!” said Padma. “If she was
really as nice as she pretends to be—”
“Can you cast the Patronus Charm, Padma Patil? You dared not even
attempt it, you feared what the result would be.”
“That’s not true! I didn’t have time, that was all!”
The whisper continued. “But Hermione Granger did try, openly
before her friends, and when her magic failed she was surprised and
dismayed. For there are secrets to the Patronus Charm that few ever
knew, and maybe none now know but I.” A soft, whispery chuckle.
“Let it stand that it is no stain of her spirit that halts her light from coming forth. Hermione Granger cannot cast the Patronus Charm for the
very same reason that Godric Gryﬃndor, who raised these halls, never
could.”
The corridor was becoming colder, she was certain of it, as though
someone were using the Chilling Charm.
“And Harry Potter is not Hermione Granger’s only ally.” Now there
was an undertone of dry amusement in that whisper, it reminded her
suddenly and frighteningly of Professor Quirrell. “Filius Flitwick and
Minerva McGonagall are quite fond of her, I do believe. Did it occur to
you that if those two learned what you were doing to Hermione Granger, they might become less fond of you? They might not intervene
openly, perhaps; but they might be a little slower to award you House
Points, a little slower to steer opportunities your way—”
“Potter snarked on me?”
A ghostly chuckle, a dry heh-heh-heh. “Do you think those two are
stupid, deaf and blind?” In a sadder whisper, “Do you think Hermione
Granger is not precious to them, that they will not see her hurting? As
they might have been fond of you once, their bright young Padma Patil,
but you are throwing it away...”
Padma’s throat was dry. She hadn’t thought of that, not at all.
“I wonder how many people will end up caring for you, Padma Patil,
on this path that you now tread. Is it worth that much, just to distance
*

822 *

**
*

SELF CENTEREDNESS

*
*

*

yourself further from your sister? To be the shadow to Parvati’s light?
Your deepest fear has always been to fall into harmony with her, back
into harmony with her I should say; but is it worth hurting an innocent
girl, just to make yourself that much more diﬀerent? Must you be the
evil twin, Padma Patil, can you not ﬁnd a diﬀerent good to pursue?”
Her heart was hammering in her chest. She’d, she’d never talked
about that with anyone—
“I have always wondered at how students bully each other,” sighed
the voice. “How children make life diﬃcult for themselves, how they
turn their schools into prisons even with their own hands. Why do
human beings make their own lives so unpleasant? I can give you a part
of the answer, Padma Patil. It is because people do not stop and think
before causing pain, if they do not imagine that they themselves could
also be hurt, that they might also suﬀer from their own misdeeds. But
suﬀer you will, oh, yes, Padma Patil, suﬀer you will, if you stay on this
road. You will suﬀer the same pain of loneliness, the same pain of others’
fear and distrust, that you now inﬂict on Hermione Granger. Only for
you it will be deserved.”
Her wand was shaking in her hand.
“You did not choose sides when you went to Ravenclaw, girl. You
choose your side by the way you live your life, what you do to other
people and what you do to yourself. Will you illuminate others’ lives,
or darken them? That is the choice between Light and Dark, not any
word the Sorting Hat cries out. And the hard part, Padma Patil, is not
saying ‘Light’, the hard part is deciding which is which, and admitting it
to yourself when you begin down the wrong road.”
There was silence. It went on for a time, and Padma realized that she
had been dismissed.
Padma almost dropped her wand, when she tried to put it back into
her pocket. She almost fell, when she took a step forward away from the
wall, and turned to go—
“I have not always chosen rightly beween Light and Dark,” the whisper said, now loud and harsh directly into her ear. “Do not take my
wisdom as a ﬁnal word, girl, do not fear to question it, for though I tried
I have sometimes failed, oh, yes, I have failed. But you are hurting a
*

823 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y

*
*

*

true innocent, and you will achieve none of your ambitions by doing
so, it is not for any cunning plan. You are inﬂicting pain purely for the
sake of the pleasure it brings you. I have not always chosen rightly between Light and Dark, but that I know for darkness, for certain. You
are hurting an innocent girl, and escaping retribution only because she
is too kindly to tolerate her allies moving against you. I cannot hurt you
for that, so know only that I cannot respect it. You are unworthy of
Slytherin; go and do your Herbology homework, Ravenclaw girl!”
The ﬁnal whisper came out in a louder hiss that sounded almost like
a snake, and Padma ﬂed, she ﬂed down the corridors like Lethifolds were
chasing her, she ran heedless of the rules about running in the corridors,
even when she passed other students who looked at her in surprise, she
did not stop, she ran all the way to the Ravenclaw dorms with her pulse
pounding in her neck, the door asked her “Why does the Sun shine in
the day instead of the nighttime?” and it took her three tries before she
could make her answer coherent, and then the door came open and she
saw—
—a few girls and boys, some young and some old, all staring at her,
and in one corner at the pentagonal table, Harry Potter and Michael
Corner and Kevin Entwhistle, looking up from their textbooks.
“Sweet Merlin!” exclaimed Penelope Clearwater, rising from a couch.
“What happened to you, Padma?”
“I,” she stuttered, “I, I heard—a ghost—”
“It wasn’t the Bloody Baron, was it?” said Clearwater. She drew her
wand and a moment later she was holding a cup, and then an Aguamenti
later the cup was ﬁlled with water. “Here, drink this, sit down—”
Padma was already striding toward the pentagonal table. She looked
at Harry Potter, who was looking at her with his own gaze, calm and
grave and a little sad.
“You did this!” Padma said. “How—you—how dare you!”
There was a sudden hush in the Ravenclaw dorm.
Harry just looked at her.
And said, “Is there anything I can help you with?”
“Don’t deny it,” Padma said, her voice shaking, “you set that ghost
on me, it said—”
*

824 *

**
*

SELF CENTEREDNESS

*
*

*

“I mean it,” Harry said. “Can I help you with anything? Get you
some food, or go fetch a soda for you, or help you with your homework,
or anything like that?”
Everyone was staring at the two of them.
“Why?” Padma said. She couldn’t think of anything else to say, she
didn’t understand.
“Because some of us are standing on the precipice,” Harry said. “And
the diﬀerence is what you do for other people. Will you let me help you
with something, Padma, please?”
She stared at him, and knew, in that moment, that he’d gotten his
own warning, same as her.
“I...” she said. “I’ve got to write six inches on lomillialor—”
“Let me run up to my dorm room and get my Herbology stuﬀ,”
Harry said. He rose from the pentagonal table, looked at Entwhistle
and Corner. “Sorry, guys, I’ll see you later.”
They didn’t say anything, just stared, along with everyone else in the
dorm room, as Harry Potter walked over to the stairs.
And just as he started up, he said, “And no one’s to pester her with
questions unless she wants to talk about it, I hope everyone’s got that?”
“Got it,” said most of the ﬁrst years and some of the older students,
a few of them sounding quite scared.

**
*
And she talked about a lot of things with Harry Potter besides lomillialor
wood—even her fear of falling back into harmony with Parvati, which
she’d never talked about with anyone before, but then Harry’s ghostly
ally already knew. And Harry had reached into his pouch and pulled out
some odd books, loaning them to her on condition of complete secrecy,
saying that if she could comprehend those books it would change the
pattern of her thinking enough that she’d never fall into harmony with
Parvati again...
At nine o’ clock, when Harry said he had to go, the essay was only
half done.
*

825 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y

*
*

*

And when Harry paused, and looked at her on the way out, and said
that he thought she was worthy of Slytherin, it made her feel good for
a whole minute before she realized what had just been said to her and
who had said it.

**
*
When Padma got down to breakfast, that morning, she saw Mandy see
her and whisper something to the girl sitting beside her at the Ravenclaw
table.
She saw that girl get up from the bench and walk toward her.
Last night Padma had been glad that girl roomed in the other dorm;
but now that she thought about it, this was worse, now she had to do it
in front of everyone.
But even though Padma was sweating, she knew what she had to do.
The girl came closer—
“I’m sorry.”
“What?” said Padma. That was her line.
“I’m sorry,” repeated Hermione Granger. Her voice was loud so that
everyone could hear. “I... I didn’t ask Harry to do that, and I was angry
with him when I found out, and I made him promise not to do it again to
anyone, and I’m not talking to him for a week... I’m really, really sorry,
Miss Patil.”
Hermione Granger’s back was stiﬀ, her face was stiﬀ, you could see
the sweat on her face.
“Um,” said Padma. Her own thoughts were pretty much scrambled,
now...
Padma’s gaze ﬂicked to the Ravenclaw table, where one boy was
watching them with tight eyes and his hands clenched in his lap.

**
*
Earlier:
“I told you to be nicer!” shrieked Hermione.
*

826 *

**
*

SELF CENTEREDNESS

*
*

*

Harry was starting to sweat. He’d never actually heard Hermione
scream at him before, and it was quite loud in the empty classroom.
“I—but—but I was nice!” Harry protested. “I practically redeemed
her, Padma was going down the wrong path and I turned her oﬀ it! I
probably changed her whole life to be happier! Besides, you should’ve
heard the original version of what Professor Quirrell suggested I do—”
at which point Harry realized what he was saying and closed his mouth
a second too late.
Hermione clutched at her chestnut curls, a gesture Harry hadn’t seen
from her before. “What’d he say to do? Kill her?”
The Defense Professor had suggested that Harry identify all the key
inﬂuential students inside and outside his year and try to gain control
of the entire Hogwarts rumor mill, remarking that this was a generally
useful and amusing challenge for any true Slytherin attending Hogwarts.
“Nothing like that,” Harry said quickly, “he just said in a general
way that I should get inﬂuence over the people spreading rumors, and
I decided that the nice version of that would be to just inform Padma
directly about the meaning of what she was doing, and the possible consequences of her actions, instead of trying to threaten her or anything
like that—”
“You call that not threatening someone?” Hermione’s hands were
pulling at her hair now.
“Um...” Harry said. “I guess she might’ve felt a little threatened, but
Hermione, people will do whatever they think they can get away with,
they don’t care about how much it hurts other people if it doesn’t hurt
themselves, if Padma thinks there’s no consequences to spreading lies
about you then of course she’ll just go on doing it—”
“And you think there’s going to be no consequences to what you
did?”
Harry got a sudden sick feeling to his stomach.
Hermione had the angriest look on her that he’d ever seen. “What
do you think the other students think of you now, Harry? Of me? If
Harry doesn’t like the way you talk about Hermione, you’ll get ghosts
set on you, is that what you want them to think?”
Harry opened his mouth and no words came out, he just... hadn’t
*

827 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y

*
*

*

thought about it that way, actually...
Hermione reached down to grab her books from the table where
she’d slammed them. “I’m not talking to you for a week, and I’ll tell
everyone I’m not talking to you for a week, and I’ll tell them why, and
maybe that’ll undo some of what you just did. And after that week, I’ll—
I’ll decide then what to do, I guess—”
“Hermione!” Harry’s own voice rose to a shriek of desperation. “I
was trying to help!”
The girl turned back and looked at him as she opened the classroom
door.
“Harry,” she said, and her voice trembled a little beneath the anger,
“Professor Quirrell is sucking you into the darkness, he really is, I mean
it, Harry.”
“This... wasn’t him, this wasn’t what he said to do, this was just me—”
Hermione’s voice was almost a whisper now. “Someday you’re going
to go out to lunch with him, and it will be your dark side that comes
back, or maybe even you won’t come back at all.”
“I promise you,” Harry said, “that I will come back from lunch.”
He wasn’t even thinking as he said it.
And Hermione just turned around and strode out and slammed the
door behind her.
Way to invoke the laws of dramatic irony, moron, observed Harry’s
Internal Critic. Now you’re going to die this Saturday, your last words will
be ‘I’m sorry, Hermione’, and she’ll always regret that the last thing she did
was slam the door—
Oh, shut up.

**
*
When Padma sat down with Hermione for breakfast, and said in a voice
loud enough for others to hear that the ghost had just told her things
that were important for her to hear, and Harry Potter had been right to
do it, there were some people who were less frightened afterward, and
some who were frightened more.
*

828 *

**
*

SELF CENTEREDNESS

*
*

*

And afterward people did say fewer nasty things about Hermione,
at least in the ﬁrst year, at least in public where Harry Potter might hear
about it.
When Professor Flitwick asked Harry if he was responsible for what
had happened to Padma, and Harry said yes, Professor Flitwick told him
that he was to serve two days’ detention. Even if it had only been a ghost
and Padma hadn’t been hurt, still, that wasn’t acceptable behavior for a
Ravenclaw student. Harry nodded and said that he understood why the
Professor had to do that, and wouldn’t protest; but considering that it did
seem to have turned Padma around, did Professor Flitwick really think,
oﬀ the record, that he’d done the wrong thing? And Professor Flitwick
paused, seeming to actually think about it, and then said to Harry, in a
solemnly squeaky voice, that he needed to learn how to relate to other
students the normal way.
And Harry couldn’t help but think that this was advice that Professor
Quirrell would never give him.
Harry couldn’t help but think that if he’d done it Professor Quirrell’s way, the normal Slytherin way, a mixture of positive and negative
incentives to bring Padma and the other rumor-mongers under his explicit control, then Padma wouldn’t have talked about it, and Hermione
would have never found out...
...in which case Padma wouldn’t have been redeemed, she would have
stayed on the wrong path, and she herself would have suﬀered from that
eventually. It wasn’t as if Harry had lied to Padma in any way, when he
was Time-Turned and invisible and using the Ventriloquism Charm.
Harry still wasn’t sure whether he’d done the right thing, or a right
thing, and Hermione hadn’t relented on not talking to him—though she
was talking a lot with Padma. It hurt more than Harry had expected,
going back to studying by himself; like his brain had already started to
forget its long-honed skill of being alone.
The days until Saturday’s lunch with Professor Quirrell seemed to
go by very, very slowly.

*

829 *

CHAPTER

FIFT Y-ONE

TITLE REDACTED, PART I
aturday.
Harry had run into trouble falling asleep Friday night, which he had
anticipated might happen, and so he had decided to take the obvious
advance precaution of buying a sleeping potion; and to prevent it from
constituting a visible sign that he was nervous, he had decided to buy it
oﬀ Fred and George a couple of months earlier. (Be prepared, that’s the
Boy Scout’s marching song...)
Thus Harry was fully rested, and his pouch contained almost everything which he owned and might conceivably need. Harry had, in fact,
run into the volume limitation on the pouch; and keeping in mind that
he would need to store a large snake, and might need to store who-knewwhat-else, he had removed some of the bulkier items, like the car battery.
He was up to the point now where he could Transﬁgure something the
size of a car battery in four minutes ﬂat, so it wasn’t much of a loss.
Harry had kept the emergency ﬂares and the oxyacetylene welding
torch and fuel tank, since you couldn’t just Transﬁgure things that were
to be burned.
(Be prepared, as through life you march along...)
Mary’s Place.
After the waitress had taken their order and bowed to them and
left the room, Professor Quirrell had performed only four Charms, and
then they’d talked about nothing of any vast consequence, just Professor
Quirrell’s complex thesis about how the Dark Lord’s curse on the Defense position had led to the decline of dueling and how this had changed
social customs in magical Britain. Harry listened and nodded and said
intelligent things, while he tried to control the pounding of his heart.

S

*

831

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-ONE

*
*

*

Then the waitress came in again bearing their food, and this time,
a minute after the waitress had departed, Professor Quirrell gestured
for the door to close and lock, and began to speak twenty-nine security
Charms, one of the ones in Mr. Bester’s sequence being left out this time,
which somewhat puzzled Harry.
Professor Quirrell ﬁnished his Charms—
—stood up from his chair—
—blurred into a green snake, banded in blue and white—
—hissed, “Hungry, boy? Eat your ﬁll sswiftly, we sshall need both
sstrength and time.”
Harry’s eyes were a bit wide, but he hissed, “I ate well at breakfasst,”
and then rapidly began forking noodles into his mouth.
The snake watched him for a moment, with those ﬂat eyes, and then
hissed, “Do not wissh to explain here. Prefer to be elssewhere ﬁrsst. Need to
leave unobsserved, without ssign we have ever departed room.”
“Sso no one can track uss,” hissed Harry.
“Yess. Do you trusst me that much, boy? Think before ansswer. I will
have important requesst of you, which requiress trusst; if ssay no regardlesss,
then ssay no now.”
Harry dropped his gaze from the snake’s ﬂat eyes, and looked back
down at his sauce-coated noodles, and ate another bite, then another,
while he thought.
The Defense Professor... was an ambiguous ﬁgure, to put it mildly;
Harry thought he had unraveled some of his goals, but others remained
mysterious.
But Professor Quirrell had knocked down two hundred girls to stop
the ones summoning Harry. Professor Quirrell had deduced that the
Dementor was draining Harry through his wand. The Defense Professor
had saved Harry’s life, twice, in a two-week period.
Which could mean that the Defense Professor was just saving Harry
for later, that there were ulterior motives. Indeed, it was certain that there
were ulterior motives. Professor Quirrell wasn’t doing this on a whim.
But then Professor Quirrell had also seen Harry taught Occlumency,
he had taught Harry how to lose... if the Defense Professor wanted to
make some use of Harry Potter, it was a use that required a strengthened
*

832 *

**
*

TITLE REDACTED I

*
*

*

Harry Potter, not a weakened one. That was what it meant to be used
by a friend, that they would want the use to make you stronger instead
of weaker.
And if there was sometimes a cold atmosphere about the Defense
Professor, bitterness in his voice or emptiness in his gaze, then Harry
was the only one who Professor Quirrell allowed to see it.
Harry didn’t quite know how to describe in words the sense of kinship he felt with Professor Quirrell, except to say that the Defense Professor was the only clear-thinking person Harry had met in the wizarding world. Sooner or later everyone else started playing Quidditch, or
not putting protective shells on their time machines, or thinking that
Death was their friend. It didn’t matter how good their intentions were.
Sooner or later, and usually sooner, they demonstrated that something
deep inside their brain was confused. Everyone except Professor Quirrell. It was a bond that went beyond anything of debts owed, or even
anything of personal liking, that the two of them were alone in the wizarding world. And if the Defense Professor occasionally seemed a little
scary or a little Dark, well, that was just the same thing some people said
about Harry.
“I trusst you,” hissed Harry.
And the snake explained the ﬁrst stage of the plan.

**
*
Harry took a ﬁnal forkful of noodles, chewed. Beside him, Professor
Quirrell, now in human form again, was eating his soup placidly, as
though nothing of special interest were occurring.
Then Harry swallowed, and in the same moment stood up from his
chair, already feeling his heart start to hammer hard in his chest. The
security precautions they were taking were literally the most stringent
possible...
“Are you ready to test it, Mr. Potter?” Professor Quirrell said calmly.
*

833 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-ONE

*
*

*

It wasn’t a test, but Professor Quirrell wouldn’t say that, not out loud
in human speech, even in this room screened to the limit that Professor
Quirrell had secured with further Charms.
“Yep,” Harry said as casually as he could.
Step one.
Harry said “Cloak” to his pouch, drew forth the Cloak of Invisibility,
and then unstuck the pouch from his belt and threw it toward the other
side of the table.
The Defense Professor stood up from his own seat, drew his wand,
bent down, and touched his wand to the pouch, murmuring a quiet incantation. The new enchantments would ensure that Professor Quirrell
could enter the pouch on his own in snakeform, and leave it on his own,
and hear what went on outside while he was in the pouch.
Step two.
As Professor Quirrell stood up from where he’d bent over by the
pouch, and put away his wand, his wand happened to point in Harry’s
direction, and there was a brief crawling sensation on Harry’s chest near
where the Time-Turner lay, like something creepy had passed very close
by without touching him.
Step three.
The Defense Professor turned into a snake again, and the sense of
doom diminished; the snake crawled to the pouch and into it, the pouch’s
mouth opening to admit the green shape, and as the mouth closed again
behind the tail, the sense of doom diminished further.
Step four.
Harry drew his wand, being careful to stand still as he did it, so
that the Time-Turner would not move from where Professor Quirrell
had anchored the hourglass within the shell in its current orientation.
“Wingardium Leviosa,” murmured Harry, and the pouch began to ﬂoat
toward him.
Slowly, slowly, as Professor Quirrell had instructed, the pouch began to ﬂoat toward Harry, who waited alert for any sign the pouch was
opening, in which case Harry was to use the Hover Charm to propel it
away from him as fast as possible.
As the pouch came within a meter of Harry, the sense of doom re*

834 *

**
*

TITLE REDACTED I

*
*

*

turned.
As Harry reattached the pouch to his belt, the sense of doom was
stronger than it had ever been, but still not overwhelming; it was tolerable.
Even with Professor Quirrell’s Animagus form lying within the extended space of the pouch resting on Harry’s very hip.
Step ﬁve.
Harry sheathed his wand. His other hand still held the Cloak of
Invisibility, and Harry drew that cloak over himself.
Step six.
And so in that room shielded from every possible scrying, which
Professor Quirrell had personally and further secured, it was not until
after Harry was wearing the true Cloak of Invisibility that he reached
beneath his shirt and twisted the outer shell of the Time-Turner just
once.
The Time-Turner’s inner hourglass stayed anchored and motionless,
the setting twisted around it—
The food vanished from the table, the chairs leaped back into place,
the door sprang open.
Mary’s Room was deserted, as it should have been, because Professor
Quirrell had earlier contacted Mary’s Place under a false name to inquire
whether the room would be available at this hour—not to reserve it, not
to place a canceled reservation that might be noted, but only to inquire.
Step seven.
Staying under the Cloak of Invisibility, Harry left through the open
door. He navigated the tiled hallways of Mary’s Place to the well-stocked
bar that greeted new entrants, tended by the owner, Jake. There were
only a few people at the bar, in the morning before proper lunchtime,
and Harry had to wait invisibly by the door for several minutes, listening
to the murmur of conversation and the gurgle of alcohol, before the door
opened to admit a huge genial Irishman, and Harry slipped out silently
in his wake.
Step eight.
Harry walked for a while. He was well away from Mary’s Place when
he turned oﬀ Diagon Alley into a smaller alley, at the end of which lay
*

835 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-ONE

*
*

*

a shop that was dark, the windows enchanted to blackness.
Step nine.
“Sword ﬁsh melon friend,” Harry spoke the passphrase to the lock,
and it clicked open.
Within the shop was also darkness, the light from the open door
brieﬂy illuminating it to show a wide, empty room. The furniture shop
which had once operated here had gone bankrupt a few months ago,
according to the Defense Professor, and the shop had been repossessed,
but not yet resold. The walls were painted a simple white, the wooden
ﬂoor scratched and unpolished, a single closed door set in the back wall;
this had been a showroom, once, but now it showed nothing.
The door clicked shut behind Harry, and then the darkness was pitch
and complete.
Step ten.
Harry took out his wand and said “Lumos”, lighting the room with
white glow; he took his pouch from his belt (the sense of doom growing
a little sharper as he grasped it with his ﬁngers) and lightly tossed it to the
opposite side of the room (the sense of doom fading almost completely).
And then he began to take oﬀ the Cloak of Invisibility, even as his voice
hissed, “It iss done.”
Step eleven.
From the pouch poked a green head, followed shortly by a meterlong green body as the snake slithered out. A moment later, the snake
blurred into Professor Quirrell.
Step twelve.
Harry waited in silence while the Defense Professor recited thirty
Charms.
“All right,” Professor Quirrell said calmly, when he had ﬁnished. “If
anyone is still watching us now, we are in any case doomed, so I will
speak plainly and in human form. Parseltongue does not quite suit me,
I fear, as I am neither a descendant of Salazar nor a true snake.”
Harry nodded.
“So, Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell. His gaze intent, his pale
blue eyes dark and shadowed in the white light coming from Harry’s
wand. “We are alone and unobserved, and I have an important question
*

836 *

**
*

TITLE REDACTED I

*
*

*

to ask you.”
“Go ahead,” said Harry, his heart starting to beat faster.
“What is your opinion of the government of magical Britain?”
That wasn’t quite what Harry had been expecting, but it was close
enough, so Harry said, “Based on my limited knowledge, I would say
that both the Ministry and the Wizengamot appear to be stupid, corrupt,
and evil.”
“Correct,” Professor Quirrell said. “Do you understand why I ask?”
Harry took a deep breath, and looked Professor Quirrell straight
in the eyes, unﬂinching. Harry had ﬁnally worked out that the way to
make amazing deductions from scanty evidence was to know the answer
in advance, and he had guessed this answer fully a week ago. It needed
only a slight adjustment...
“You are about to invite me to join a secret organization full of interesting people like yourself,” said Harry, “one of whose goals is to reform
or overthrow the government of magical Britain, and yes, I’m in.”
There was a slight pause.
“I’m afraid that is not quite where I intended to direct this conversation,” said Professor Quirrell. The corners of his lips were twitching
slightly. “I merely planned to ask for your help in doing something extremely treasonous and illegal.”
Darn, thought Harry. Still, Professor Quirrell hadn’t denied it... “Go
on.”
“Before I do,” said Professor Quirrell. There was no levity in his
voice, now. “Are you open to such requests, Mr. Potter? I say again
that if you are likely to say no regardless, you must say no now. If your
curiosity impels you otherwise, squash it.”
“Treasonous and illegal doesn’t bother me,” said Harry. “Risks
bother me and the stakes would need to be commensurate, but I can’t
imagine you taking risks frivolously.”
Professor Quirrell nodded. “I would not. It is a terrible abuse of
my friendship with you, and of such trust as is placed in my teaching
position at Hogwarts—”
“You can skip this part,” Harry said.
The lips twitched again, and then went ﬂat. “Then I shall skip it.
*

837 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-ONE

*
*

*

Mr. Potter, you sometimes make a game of lying with truths, playing
with words to conceal your meanings in plain sight. I, too, have been
known to ﬁnd that amusing. But if I so much as tell you what I hope we
shall do this day, Mr. Potter, you will lie about it. You will lie straight
out, without hesitation, without wordplay or hints, to anyone who asks
about it, be they foe or closest friend. You will lie to Malfoy, to Granger, and to McGonagall. You will speak, always and without hesitation,
in exactly the fashion you would speak if you knew nothing, with no
concern for your honor. That also is how it must be.”
There was silence, then, for a time.
That was a price measured in a fraction of Harry’s soul.
“Without telling me yet...” said Harry. “Can you say if the need is
desperate?”
“There is someone in the most terrible want of your help,” Professor
Quirrell said simply, “and there is no one who can help them but you.”
There was another silence, but not a long one.
“All right,” Harry said quietly. “Tell me of the mission.”
The dark robes of the Defense Professor seemed to blur against the
shadow on the wall, cast by his silhouette blocking the white light of
Harry’s wand. “The ordinary Patronus Charm, Mr. Potter, wards oﬀ a
Dementor’s fear. But the Dementors still see you through it, they know
that you are there. Only not your Patronus Charm. It blinds them,
or more than blinds them. What I saw beneath the cloak wasn’t even
looking in our direction as you killed it; as though it had forgotten our
existence, even as it died.”
Harry nodded. That wasn’t surprising, not when you confronted a
Dementor on the level of its true existence, beyond anthropomorphism.
Death might be the last enemy, but it wasn’t a sentient enemy. When
humanity had wiped out smallpox, smallpox hadn’t fought back.
“Mr. Potter, the central branch of Gringotts is guarded by every spell
high and low that the goblins know. Even so those vaults have been
successfully robbed; for what wizardry can do, wizardry can undo. And
yet no one has ever escaped from Azkaban. No one. For every Charm
there is a counter-Charm, for every ward there is a bypass. How can it
be that no one has ever been rescued from Azkaban?”
*

838 *

**
*

TITLE REDACTED I

*
*

*

“Because Azkaban has something invincible,” Harry said. “Something so terrible that no one can defeat it.”
That was the keystone of their perfect security, it had to be, nothing
human. It was Death that guarded Azkaban.
“The Dementors don’t like their meals being taken away from them,”
Professor Quirrell said. Coldness had entered that voice, now. “They
know if anyone tries. There are more than a hundred Dementors there,
and they speak to the guards as well. It’s that simple, Mr. Potter. If you’re
a powerful wizard then Azkaban isn’t hard to enter, and it isn’t hard to
leave. So long as you don’t try to take anything out of it that belongs to
the Dementors.”
“But the Dementors are not invincible,” said Harry. He could have
cast the Patronus Charm with that thought, in that very moment.
“Never believe that they are.”
Professor Quirrell’s voice was very quiet. “Do you remember what
it was like when you went before the Dementor, the ﬁrst time, when
you failed?”
“I remember.”
And then with a sudden sickening lurch in his stomach, Harry knew
where this was going; he should have seen it before.
“There is an innocent person in Azkaban,” Professor Quirrell said.
Harry nodded, there was a burning sensation in his throat, but he
didn’t cry.
“The one of whom I speak was not under the Imperius Curse,” said
the Defense Professor, dark robes silhouetted against a greater shadow.
“There are surer ways to break wills than the Imperius, if you have the
time for torture, and Legilimency, and rituals of which I will not speak.
I cannot tell you how I know this, how I know any of this, cannot hint
at it even to you, you will have to trust me. But there is a person in
Azkaban who never once chose to serve the Dark Lord, who has spent
years suﬀering alone in the most terrible cold and darkness imaginable,
and never deserved a single minute of it.”
Harry saw it in a single leap of intuition, his mouth racing almost
ahead of his thoughts.
There was no hint, no warning, we all thought—
*

839 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-ONE

*
*

*

“A person by the name of Black,” Harry said.
There was silence. Silence, while the pale blue eyes stared at him.
“Well,” said Professor Quirrell after a while. “So much for not telling
you the name until after you had accepted the mission. I would ask
whether you’re reading my mind, but that’s ﬂatly impossible.”
Harry said nothing, but it was simple enough if you believed in the
processes of modern democracy. The most obvious person in Azkaban
to be innocent was the one who hadn’t gotten a trial—
“I am certainly impressed, Mr. Potter,” said Professor Quirrell. His
face was grave. “But this is a serious matter, and if there is some way others could make the same deduction, I must know. So tell me, Mr. Potter.
How in the name of Merlin, of Atlantis, and the void between the stars,
did you guess that I was talking about Bellatrix?”

*

840 *

CHAPTER

FIFT Y-TWO

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART II
,
he adrenaline was already ﬂowing in Harry’s veins, his heart
already hammering in his chest, there in that darkened and
bankrupt store. Professor Quirrell had ﬁnished explaining, and in one
hand, Harry held a tiny wooden twig that would be the key. This was
it, this was the day and the moment when Harry started acting the part.
His ﬁrst true adventure, a dungeon to be pierced, an evil government to
be deﬁed, a maiden in distress to be rescued. Harry should have been
more frightened, more reluctant, but instead he felt only that it was
time and past time to start becoming the people he had read about in
his books; to begin his journey toward what he had always known he
was meant to be, a hero. To take the ﬁrst step on the road that led to
Kimball Kinnison and Captain Picard and Liono of Thundera and deﬁnitely not Raistlin Majere. So far as Harry’s brain knew from watching
early morning cartoons, when you grew up you were supposed to gain
amazing powers and save the universe, that was what Harry’s brain had
seen adults doing and adopted as its role model for the maturation process, and Harry very much wanted to start growing up.
And if the pattern of the story called for the hero to lose some part
of his innocence, as the result of his ﬁrst adventure; then for now, at
least, in this still-innocent moment, it seemed time and past time for
him to experience that pain. Like casting oﬀ clothes too small for him;
or like ﬁnally advancing to the next stage of the game, after being stuck
for eleven years on world 3, level 2 of Super Mario Brothers.

T

*

841

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Harry had read enough novels to suspect that he wouldn’t feel this
enthusiastic afterward, so he was enjoying it while it lasted.
There was a popping sound as something near Harry disappeared,
and then there was no more time for heroic brooding.
Harry’s hand snapped the small wooden twig.
A hook yanked motionlessly at Harry’s abdomen as the portkey activated, feeling like a much harder pull this time than the smaller transports between the Hogwarts grounds and Diagon Alley—
—and dropped him into the middle of a huge roll of thunder dying
away, and a lash of cold rain whipping him across the face, the water
coating Harry’s glasses and blinding him in an instant, turning the world
into a blur even as he began to fall toward the raging ocean waves far
below.
He had arrived high, high, high above the empty North Sea.
The shock of the blasting storm almost made Harry let go of the
broomstick that Professor Quirrell had given him, which would not have
been a good idea. It took nearly a full second for Harry to get his wits
together and bring his broomstick back up in an easy swoop.
“I’m here,” said an unfamiliar voice from a patch of empty air above
him; low and gravelly, the voice of the sallow lanky bearded man Professor Quirrell had Polyjuiced into before Disillusioning himself and his
broomstick.
“I’m here,” Harry said from beneath the Cloak of Invisibility. He
hadn’t used Polyjuice himself. Wearing a diﬀerent body hindered your
magic, and Harry might need all of his little magic about him; thus
the plan called for Harry to stay invisible at nearly all times, instead
of Polyjuicing.
(Neither of them had spoken the other’s name. You simply didn’t
use your names at any point during an illegal mission, even invisibly hovering over an anonymous patch of water in the North Sea. You simply
didn’t. It would be stupid.)
Carefully keeping a grip on the broomstick with one hand, while the
rain and wind howled around him, Harry raised his wand in an equally
careful grip and Imperviused his glasses.
Then, with the lenses clear, Harry looked around.
*

842 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT II

*
*

*

He was surrounded by wind and rain, it might have been ﬁve degrees
Celsius if he was lucky; he’d already had a Warming Charm cast on himself just from being outside in February, but it wasn’t standing up to the
driving cold droplets. Worse than snow, the rain soaked into every exposed surface. The Cloak of Invisibility turned all of you invisible, but
it didn’t cover all of you, and that meant it didn’t protect all of you from
rain. Harry’s face was exposed to the full force of the driven water, and
it was driving straight into his neck and soaking down into his shirt, also
the sleeves of his robes and the cuﬀs of his pants and his shoes, the water
took every bit of cloth as an avenue to sneak in.
“This way,” said the Polyjuiced voice, and a spark of green light lit
up in front of Harry’s broomstick, and then darted away in a direction
that seemed to Harry like every other direction.
Through the blinding rain, Harry followed. He lost it sometimes,
that small green spark, and each time he did, Harry called out, and the
spark would reappear in front of him a few seconds later.
When Harry had caught the trick of following the spark, it accelerated, and Harry kicked the broomstick into high gear and followed. The
rain whipped him harder, feeling like Harry imagined it must feel to get
a faceful of shotgun pellets, but his glasses stayed clear and protected his
eyes.
It was only a few minutes later, at the broomstick’s full speed, that
Harry caught a glimpse of a huge shadow through the rain, towering far
across the waters.
And felt a distant, hollow echo of emptiness radiating from where
Death waited, washing over Harry’s mind and parting around it, like a
wave breaking on stone. Harry knew his enemy this time, and his will
was steel and all of the light.
“I can already feel the Dementors,” said the gravelly voice of the
Polyjuiced Quirrell. “I did not expect that, not this soon.”
“Think of the stars,” Harry said, over a distant rumble of thunder.
“Don’t allow any anger in you, nothing negative, just think of the stars,
what it feels like to forget yourself and fall bodilessly through space.
Hold to that thought like an Occlumency barrier across your entire
mind. The Dementors will have some trouble reaching past that.”
*

843 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-TWO

*
*

*

There was silence for a moment, then, “Interesting.”
The green spark lifted, and Harry inclined his broomstick slightly
upward to follow, even as it steered them into a fogbank, a cloud hovering low on the waters.
Soon they were hovering above and slightly oblique of the huge
three-sided metal building, as it loomed far below. The triangle of steel
was hollow, not solid, it was a building of three thick solid walls and
no center. The Aurors on guard roomed in the top level and southern
side of the building, Professor Quirrell had said, protected by their Patronus Charms. The legal entrance into Azkaban was on the roof of the
southwest corner of the building. Which the two of them wouldn’t use,
of course. Instead they would use a corridor that ran directly beneath
the northern corner of the building. Professor Quirrell would go down
ﬁrst, and puncture a hole in the roof and its wards right at the northern
tip, leaving behind an illusion to cover the gap.
The prisoners were kept in the side of the building, in levels corresponding to their crimes. And at the bottom, in the uttermost center
and depth of Azkaban, lay a nest of more than a hundred Dementors.
Loads of dirt were occasionally dropped in to keep up the level, as the
matter directly exposed to the Dementors broke down into mud and
nothingness...
“Wait one minute,” said the rough voice, “follow me at speed, and
pass through with care.”
“Got it,” Harry said lowly.
The spark winked out, and Harry began to count, one one thousand,
two one thousand, three one thousand...
...sixty one thousand, and Harry dived, the wind shrieking around
him as he dived, down toward the vast metal structure, down toward
where he could feel the shadows of Death waiting for him, draining light
and radiating emptiness, as the metal structure grew larger and larger.
Plain and featureless loomed the vast grey shape, but for a single raised
boxlike structure in the southwest corner. The north corner was simply
blank, Professor Quirrell’s hole undetectable.
Harry pulled up sharply as he approached the north corner, giving
himself more safety margin than he would have bothered with in ﬂying
*

844 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT II

*
*

*

classes, but not too much. As soon as he’d come to a halt, he began to
slowly lower his broomstick again, toward what looked like the solid
roof of the tip of the north corner.
Descending through the illusory roof while invisible was a strange
experience, and then Harry found himself in a metal corridor lighted
with a dim orange light—which, Harry realized after a startled glance,
was coming from an old-fashioned mantled gas lamp...
...for magic would fail, be drained away after a time, in the presence
of Dementors.
Harry dismounted his broom.
The pull of the emptiness was stronger now, as it parted and ﬂowed
around Harry without touching him. They were distant but they were
many, the wounds in the world; Harry could have pointed to them with
his eyes closed.
“Casst your Patronuss,” hissed a snake from the ﬂoor, looking more
discolored than green in the dim orange light.
The note of stress came through even in Parseltongue. Harry was
surprised; Professor Quirrell had said that Animagi in their Animagus
forms were much less vulnerable to Dementors. (For the same reason
the Patronuses were animals, Harry assumed.) If Professor Quirrell was
in this much trouble in his snake form, what had been happening to him
while he was in the human form that let him use his magic...?
Harry’s wand was already rising in his hand.
This would be the beginning.
Even if it was only one person, just one person that he could save
from the darkness, even if he wasn’t powerful enough yet to teleport all
of Azkaban’s prisoners to safety and burn the triangular hell down to
bedrock...
Even so it was a start, it was a beginning, it was a down payment
on everything that Harry meant to accomplish with his life. No more
waiting, no more hoping, no more mere promising, it would all begin
here. Here and now.
Harry’s wand slashed down to point at where the Dementors waited
far below.
“Expecto Patronum!”
*

845 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-TWO

*
*

*

The glowing humanoid ﬁgure blazed up into existence. It wasn’t
the sun-bright thing that it had been before... probably because Harry
hadn’t quite been able to stop himself from thinking about all the other
prisoners in their cells, the ones that he wasn’t here to save.
It might be for the best, though. Harry would need to keep this
Patronus going for a while, and it might be better if it wasn’t quite so
bright.
The Patronus dimmed a little further, at that thought; and then further again, as Harry tried to put a little less of his magic into it, until
ﬁnally the brilliant humanoid ﬁgure was glowing only slightly brighter
than the brightest animal Patronus, and Harry felt that he could dim it
no further without risking losing it entirely.
And then, “It iss sstable,” Harry hissed, and began feeding his broomstick into his pouch. His wand stayed in his hand, and a slight, sustainable ﬂow of magic replaced the slight losses from his Patronus.
The snake blurred into the form of a lanky, sallow man, holding
Professor Quirrell’s wand in one hand and a broomstick in the other.
The lanky man staggered as he came back into existence, and went to
lean against the wall for a moment.
“Well done, if perhaps a triﬂe slow,” murmured the gravelly voice.
Professor Quirrell’s dryness was in it, even though it didn’t ﬁt the voice,
nor did the grave look on the thickly bearded face. “I cannot feel them
at all, now.”
A moment later, the broomstick went into the man’s robes and vanished. Then the man’s wand rose and tapped on his head, and with a
sound like a cracking eggshell he disappeared once more.
Within the air blossomed a faint green spark, and Harry, still enshrouded in the Cloak of Invisibility, followed after.
If you had been watching from outside, you would have seen nothing
but a small green spark drifting through the air, and a brilliantly silver
humanoid walking after it.

**
*

*

846 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT II

*
*

*

They went down, and down, and down, passing gas lamp after gas lamp,
and the occasional huge metal door, descending into Azkaban within
what seemed like utter silence. Professor Quirrell had set up some type
of barrier by which he could hear what went on nearby, but no sounds
could pass outward, and no sounds could reach Harry.
Harry hadn’t quite been able to stop his mind from wondering why
the silence, or stop his mind from giving the answer. The answer he’d
already known on some wordless level of anticipation that had prompted
him to futilely try not to think about it.
Somewhere behind those huge metal doors, people were screaming.
The silver humanoid ﬁgure wavered, brightening and dimming, every time Harry thought about it.
Harry had been told to cast a Bubble-Head Charm on himself, as
they approached the prisoner levels. To prevent himself from smelling
anything.
All the enthusiasm and heroism had worn oﬀ already, as Harry had
known it would, it hadn’t taken long even by his standards, the process
had completed itself the very ﬁrst time they passed one of those metal
doors. Every metal door was locked with a huge lock, a lock of simple unmagical metal that wouldn’t have stopped a ﬁrst-year Hogwarts
student—if you still had a wand, if you still had your magic, which the
prisoners didn’t. Those metal doors were not the doors of individual
cells, Professor Quirrell had said, each one opened into a corridor in
which there would be a group of cells. Somehow that helped a little, not
thinking that each door corresponded directly to a prisoner who was
waiting right behind it. Instead there might be more than one prisoner,
which diminished the emotional impact; just like the study showing that
people contributed more when they were told that a given amount of
money was required to save one child’s life, than when told the same
total amount was needed to save eight children...
Harry was ﬁnding it increasingly hard not to think about it, and
every time he did, the light of his Patronus ﬂuctuated.
They came to the place where the passageway turned left, at the corner of the triangular building. Once again there were descending metal
steps, another ﬂight of stairs; once again they went down.
*

847 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Mere murderers were not put into the lowest of cells. There was
always a lower place you could go, an even worse punishment to fear.
No matter how low you had already sunk, the government of magical
Britain had some threat remaining against you if you did even worse.
But Bellatrix Black had been the Death Eater who inspired more
fear than anyone save Lord Voldemort himself, a beautiful and deadly
sorceress absolutely loyal to her master; she had been, if such a thing were
possible, more sadistic and evil even than You-Know-Who, as though she
were trying to outdo her master...
...that was what the world knew of her, what the world believed of
her.
But before then, Professor Quirrell had told Harry, before the debut of the Dark Lord’s most terrible servant, there had been a girl in
Slytherin who had been quiet, keeping mostly to herself, harming no
one. Afterward there had been made-up stories told about her, memories changing in retrospect (Harry knew well the research on that). But
at the time, while she still attended school, the most talented witch in
Hogwarts had been known as a gentle girl (Professor Quirrell had said).
Her few friends had been surprised when she’d joined the Death Eaters
a year after her graduation, and more surprised that she’d been hiding so
much darkness behind that sad, wistful smile.
That was who Bellatrix had once been, the most promising witch
of her own generation, before the Dark Lord stole her and broke her,
shattered her and reshaped her, binding her to him on a deeper level and
with darker arts than any Imperius.
Ten years Bellatrix had served the Dark Lord, killing who he bade
her kill, torturing who he bade her torture.
And then the Dark Lord had ﬁnally been defeated.
And Bellatrix’s nightmare had continued.
Somewhere inside Bellatrix there might be something that was still
screaming, that had been screaming the whole time, something that
could be brought back, or there might not be, Professor Quirrell had
no way of knowing. But either way, they could...
...they could at least get her out of Azkaban...
Bellatrix Black had been put into the lowest level of Azkaban.
*

848 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT II

*
*

*

Harry was having trouble not imagining what he would see when
they got to her cell. Bellatrix must have had almost no fear of death, in
the beginning, if she was still alive at all.
They descended another ﬂight of stairs, coming that much closer to
Death and Bellatrix, the clacking of their invisible shoes the only sound
that Harry could hear. Dim orange light coming from the gas lights, the
faint green spark drifting through the air, the shining ﬁgure following
with its silver light ﬂuctuating from time to time.

**
*
After descending many times, they came in time to a corridor that did
not end in stairs, and a ﬁnal metal door, and the green spark halted before
it.
Harry’s heart had calmed a little, as they descended far into the
depths of Azkaban without anything happening. But now it was hammering his chest once more. They were at the bottom, and the shadows
of Death were very close at hand.
A soft metal click came from the lock, as Professor Quirrell opened
the way.
Harry took a deep breath and remembered everything that Professor Quirrell had told him. The hard part wouldn’t just be getting the
pretended personality right enough to fool Bellatrix Black herself, the
hard part would be keeping his Patronus going at the same time...
The green spark winked out, and a moment later a meter-high snake
shimmered into existence, no longer invisible.
The metal door moved with a slow creaking sound as Harry pushed
on it with his invisible hand, opened it just a crack, and peered through.
He saw a straight corridor that terminated in solid stone. There was
no light there but what crept in from Harry’s Patronus. That was bright
enough for him to see the outer bars of the eight cells set into the corridor, but he couldn’t see the insides; more importantly, though, he didn’t
see anyone in the corridor itself.
“I ssee nothing,” hissed Harry.
*

849 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-TWO

*
*

*

The snake darted on ahead, swiftly twisting across the ﬂoor.
A moment later—
“Sshe iss alone,” hissed the snake.
Stay, Harry thought to his Patronus, which took up a position just
to one side of the door, as though guarding it; and then Harry pushed
the door open further, and followed within.
The ﬁrst cell Harry looked at contained a dessicated corpse, skin
gone grey and mottled, ﬂesh worn through in places to expose the bone
beneath, no eyes—
Harry shut his eyes. He could still do that, he was still invisible, he
wasn’t betraying anything by shutting his eyes.
He’d known it already, he’d read it on page six of his Transﬁguration
book, that you stayed in Azkaban until your prison term was done. If
you died before it was up they kept you there until they released your
corpse. If your term was for life, they just left the body in the cell until
the cell was needed, at which point they threw your body into the Dementors’ pit. But it was still a shock to see, that corpse had been a person
who’d just been left there—
The light in the room wavered.
Steady, thought Harry in his core. It wouldn’t be good for Professor
Quirrell if that Patronus went out from his thinking sad thoughts. This
near to the Dementors the Defense Professor might just fall dead where
he stood, if he were as sensitive as he seemed to be. Steady, Harry James
Potter-Evans-Verres, steady!
With that thought, Harry opened his eyes again, there wasn’t time
to waste.
The second cell he looked at contained only a skeleton.
And behind the bars of the third cell he saw Bellatrix Black.
Something precious and irreplaceable inside Harry withered like dry
grass and vanished forever.
You could tell the woman wasn’t a skeleton, that her head wasn’t
a skull, because the texture of skin was still diﬀerent from the texture
of bone, no matter how white and pale she’d become, waiting in the
dark alone. Either they weren’t feeding her much, or what she ate, the
shadows of Death drained from her; for her eyes seemed shrunken be*

850 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT II

*
*

*

low their lids, her lips looked too shriveled to close over her teeth. The
color seemed leached out of the black clothing she had worn into prison,
like the Dementors had drained that too. They’d been meant to be daring, those clothes, and now they lay loosely over a skeleton, exposing
shriveled skin.
I’m here to save her, I’m here to save her, I’m here to save her, Harry
thought to himself, desperately, over and over with an eﬀort like Occlumency, willing his Patronus not to go out, to stay and protect Bellatrix
from the Dementors—
In his heart, in his core, Harry held to all his pity and his compassion, his will to save her from the darkness; the silver radiance coming
in through the open door brightened, even as he thought it.
And in another part of him, like he was just letting another part of
his mind carry out a habit without paying much attention to it...
A cold expression came over Harry’s face, invisibly beneath the
hood.
“Hello, my dear Bella,” said a chill whisper. “Did you miss me?”

*

851

*

CHAPTER

FIFT Y-THREE

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART III
,
he corpse of a woman opened her eyes, and the dull sunken orbs
gazed out at nothing.
“Mad,” Bellatrix muttered in a cracked voice, “It seems that little
Bella is going mad...”
Professor Quirrell had instructed Harry, calmly and precisely, how
he was to act in Bellatrix’s presence; how to form the pretense he would
maintain in his mind.
You found it expedient, or perhaps just amusing, to make Bellatrix fall
in love with you, to bind her to your service.
That love would have persisted through Azkaban, Professor Quirrell
had said, because to Bellatrix it would not be a happy thought.
She loves you utterly, completely, with her whole being. You do not return her love, but consider her useful. She knows this.
She was the deadliest weapon you possessed, and you called her your dear
Bella.
Harry remembered it from the night the Dark Lord killed his parents: the cold amusement, the contemptuous laughter, that high-pitched
voice of deathly hate. It didn’t seem at all diﬃcult to guess what the Dark
Lord would say.
“I hope you are not mad, Bella dear,” said the chill whisper. “Mad is
not useful.”
Bellatrix’s eyes ﬂickered, tried to focus on empty air.
“My... Lord... I went where you said to await you, but you did not
come... I looked for you but I could not ﬁnd you... you are alive...” All

T

*

853 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-THREE

*
*

*

her words came out in a low mutter, if there was emotion in it, Harry
could not tell.
“Sshow her your face,” hissed the snake at Harry’s feet.
Harry cast back the hood of the Cloak of Invisibility.
The part of him that Harry had placed in control of his facial expressions looked at Bella without the slightest trace of pity, only cool, calm
interest. (While in his core, Harry thought, I will save you, I will save
you no matter what...)
“The scar...” muttered Bellatrix. “That child...”
“So they all still think,” said Harry’s voice, and gave a thin little
chuckle. “You looked for me in the wrong place, Bella dear.”
(Harry had asked why Professor Quirrell couldn’t be the one to play
the part of the Dark Lord, and Professor Quirrell had pointed out that
there was no plausible reason for him to be possessed by the shade of HeWho-Must-Not-Be-Named.)
Bellatrix’s eyes remained ﬁxed on Harry, she said no word.
“Ssay ssomething in Parsseltongue,” hissed the snake.
Harry’s face turned to the snake, to make it clear that he was addressing it, and hissed, “One two three four ﬁve ssix sseven eight nine ten.”
There was a pause.
“Those who do not fear the darkness...” murmured Bellatrix.
The snake hissed, “Will be conssumed by it.”
“Will be consumed by it,” whispered the chill voice. Harry didn’t
particularly want to think about how Professor Quirrell had gotten that
password. His brain, which thought about it anyway, suggested that it
had probably involved a Death Eater, a quiet isolated place, and some
lead-pipe Legilimency.
“Your wand,” murmured Bellatrix, “I hid it in the graveyard, my
lord, before I left... under the tombstone to the right of your father’s
grave... will you kill me, now, if that was all you wished of me... I think
I must have always wanted you to be the one to kill me... but I can’t
remember now, it must have been a happy thought...”
Harry’s heart wrenched inside him, it was unbearable, and—and he
couldn’t cry, couldn’t let his Patronus fade—
Harry’s face showed a ﬂicker of annoyance, and his voice was sharp as
*

854 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT III

*
*

*

it said, “Enough foolishness. You’re to come with me, Bella dear, unless
you prefer the company of the Dementors.”
Bellatrix’s face twitched in brief puzzlement, the shrunken limbs did
not stir.
“You’ll need to ﬂoat her out,” Harry hissed to the snake. “Sshe can no
longer think of esscaping.”
“Yess,” hissed the snake, “but do not underesstimate her, sshe wass the
deadliesst of warriorss.” The green head dipped in warning. “One would
be wisse to fear me, boy, even were I sstarved and nine-tenthss dead; be wary
of her, allow no ssingle ﬂaw in your pretensse.”
The green snake smoothly glided out of the door.
And shortly after, a man with sallow skin and a fearful expression
on his bearded face cringed into the room with his wand in hand.
“My Lord?” the servant said falteringly.
“Do as you were instructed,” the Dark Lord whispered in that chill
voice, sounding even more terrible coming from a child’s body. “And
do not let your Patronus falter. Remember, if I do not return there will
be no reward for you, and it will be long before your family is allowed
to die.”
Having spoken those dreadful words, the Dark Lord pulled his invisibility cloak over his head, and disappeared.
The cringing servant opened the door to Bellatrix’s cage, and pulled
a tiny needle from his robes with which he poked the human skeleton.
The single drop of red blood produced was soon absorbed into a small
doll, which was laid upon the ﬂoor, and the servant began to chant in a
whisper.
Soon another living skeleton lay upon the ﬂoor, motionless. Afterward the servant seemed to hesitate for a moment, until from the empty
air hissed an impatient command. Then the servant pointed his wand
at Bellatrix and spoke a word, and the living skeleton lying on the bed
was naked, and the skeleton lying on the ﬂoor was clothed in her faded
dress.
The servant tore a small strip of cloth from the dress, as it lay upon
the seeming corpse; and from his own robes, the fearful man then produced an empty glass ﬂask with small traces of golden ﬂuid clinging to
*

855 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-THREE

*
*

*

its inside. This ﬂask was concealed in a corner, the strip of skirt laid over
it, the leached cloth nearly blending with the gray metal wall.
Another wave of the servant’s wand ﬂoated the human skeleton lying
on the bed into the air, and in almost the same motion clothed her in
new black robes. An ordinary-looking bottle of chocolate milk was put
into her hand, and a chill whisper ordered Bellatrix to grasp the bottle
and begin drinking it, which she did, her face still looking only puzzled.
Then the servant turned Bellatrix invisible, and turned himself invisible, and they left. The door closed behind them all and clicked as it
locked, plunging the corridor into darkness once more, unchanged but
for a small ﬂask concealed in the corner of one cell, and a fresh corpse
lying upon its ﬂoor.

**
*
Earlier, in the deserted shop, Professor Quirrell had told Harry that they
were going to commit the perfect crime.
Harry had unthinkingly started to repeat back the standard proverb
that there was no such thing as a perfect crime, before he actually thought
about it for two-thirds of a second, remembered a wiser proverb, and
shut his mouth in midsentence.
What do you think you know, and how do you think you know it?
If you did commit the perfect crime, nobody would ever ﬁnd out—
so how could anyone possibly know that there weren’t perfect crimes?
And as soon as you looked at it that way, you realized that perfect
crimes probably got committed all the time, and the coroner marked it
down as death by natural causes, or the newspaper reported that the shop
had never been very proﬁtable and had ﬁnally gone out of business...
When Bellatrix Black’s corpse was found dead in her cell the next
morning, there within the prison of Azkaban from which (everyone
knew) no one had ever escaped, nobody bothered doing an autopsy. Nobody thought twice about it. They just locked up the corridor and left,
and the Daily Prophet reported it in the obituary column the next day...
...that was the perfect crime which Professor Quirrell had planned.
And it wasn’t Professor Quirrell who screwed it up.

*

856 *

CHAPTER

FIFT Y-FOUR

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART I V
,
faint green spark moved forward to set the pace, and behind it followed a brilliant silver ﬁgure, all other entities invisible. They had
traversed ﬁve legs of corridor, turned right ﬁve times and gone up ﬁve
ﬂights of stairs; and when Bellatrix had ﬁnished her second bottle of
chocolate milk, she had been given solid bars of chocolate to eat.
It was after her third bar of chocolate that strange noises began to
come from Bellatrix’s throat.
It took a moment for Harry to understand, to process the sounds, it
didn’t sound like anything he’d ever heard before; the rhythm of it was
shattered, almost unrecognizable, it took him that long to realize that
Bellatrix was crying.
Bellatrix Black was crying, the Dark Lord’s most terrible weapon
was crying, she was invisible but you could hear it, tiny pathetic sounds
she was trying to suppress, even now.
“It’s real?” said Bellatrix. Tonality had returned into her voice, no
longer a dead mutter, it rose up at the end to form the question. “It’s
real?”
Yes, thought the part of Harry simulating the Dark Lord, now be
silent—
He couldn’t make those words pass his lips, he just couldn’t.
“I knew—you would—come to me—someday,” Bellatrix’s voice quavered and fractured as she drew breath for quiet sobs, “I knew—you were
alive—that you would come—to me—my Lord...” there was a long inhalation like a huge gasp, “and that even—when you came—you still

A

*

857 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

wouldn’t love me—never—you would never love me back—that was
why—they couldn’t take—my love from me—even though I can’t remember—can’t remember so many other things—though I don’t know
what I forgot—but I remember how much I love you, Lord—”
There was a knife stabbing through Harry’s heart, he’d never heard
anything so terrible, he wanted to hunt down the Dark Lord and kill
him just for this...
“Do you still—have use for me—my Lord?”
“No,” hissed Harry’s voice, without him even thinking, it just
seemed to be operating on automatic, “I entered Azkaban on a whim.
Of course I have use for you! Don’t ask foolish questions.”
“But—I’m weak,” said Bellatrix’s voice, and a full sob escaped her,
it sounded much too loud in the corridors of Azkaban, “I can’t kill for
you, my Lord, I’m sorry, they ate it all, ate me all up, I’m too weak to
ﬁght, what good am I to you now—”
Harry’s brain cast about desperately for some way to reassure her,
from the lips of a Dark Lord who would never speak a single word of
caring.
“Ugly,” said Bellatrix. Her voice said that word like it was the ﬁnal
nail in her coﬃn, the last despair. “I’m ugly, they ate that too, I’m, I’m
not pretty any more, you won’t even, be able, to use me, as a reward,
for your servants—even the Lestranges, won’t want, to hurt me, any
more—”
The brilliant silver ﬁgure stopped walking.
Because Harry had stopped walking.
The Dark Lord, he... The part of Harry’s self that was soft and vulnerable was screaming in disbelieving horror, trying to reject reality, refuse
the understanding, even as a colder and harder part completed the pattern: She obeyed him in that as she obeyed him in all things.
The green spark bobbed urgently, darted forward.
The silver humanoid stayed in place.
Bellatrix was sobbing harder.
“I’m, I’m not, I can’t be, useful, any more...”
Giant hands were squeezing Harry’s chest, wringing him like a washcloth, trying to crush his heart.
*

858 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT I V

*
*

*

“Please,” whispered Bellatrix, “just kill me...” Her voice seemed to
calm, once she said that. “Please Lord, kill me, I’ve no reason to live if
I’m no use to you... I only want it to stop... please hurt me one last time,
my Lord, hurt me until I stop... I love you...”
It was the saddest thing Harry had ever heard.
The bright silver shape of Harry’s Patronus ﬂickered—
Wavered—
Brightened—
The fury that was rising in Harry, his rage against the Dark Lord
who had done this, the rage against the Dementors, against Azkaban,
against the world that allowed such horror, it all seemed to be pouring
straight through his arm and into his wand without there being any way
of blocking it, he tried willing it to stop and nothing happened.
“My Lord!” whispered the disguised voice of Professor Quirrell. “My
spell is going out of control! Help me, my Lord!”
Brighter the Patronus, brighter and brighter, it was waxing faster
than on the day that Harry had destroyed a Dementor.
“My Lord!” the silhouette said in a terriﬁed whisper. “Help me! Everyone will feel it, my Lord!”
Everyone will feel it, thought Harry. His imagination could picture
it clearly, the prisoners in their cells stirring as the cold and darkness fell
away, replaced by healing light.
Every exposed surface now burned like a white sun in the reﬂections,
the silhouette of Bellatrix’s skeleton and the sallow man now clearly visible in the blaze, the Disillusionment spells unable to keep pace with the
unearthly brilliance; only the Cloak of Invisibility out of the Deathly
Hallows withstood it.
“My Lord! You must stop it!”
But Harry could no longer will it to stop, he no longer wanted it to
stop. He could sense it, more and more of the sparks of life in Azkaban
being sheltered by his Patronus, as it unfolded like spreading wings of sunlight, the air turned to absolute silver as he thought it, Harry knew what he
had to do.
“Please, my Lord!”
The words went unheard.
*

859 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

They were far from him, the Dementors in their pit, but Harry knew
that they could be destroyed even at this distance if the light blazed bright
enough, he knew that Death itself could not face him if he stopped holding
back, so he unsealed all the gates inside him and sank the wells of his spell
into all the deepest parts of his spirit, all his mind and all his will, and gave
over absolutely everything to the spell—
And in the interior of the Sun, an only slightly dimmer shadow
moved forward, reaching out an entreating hand.
WRONG
DON’T
The sudden sense of doom clashed with Harry’s steel determination,
dread and uncertainty striving against the bright purpose, nothing else
might have reached him but that. The silhouette took another step forward and another, the sense of doom rising to a point of terrible catastrophe; and in the drench of cold water, Harry saw it, he realized the
consequences of what he was doing, the danger and the trap.
If you had been watching from outside you would have seen the interior of the Sun brightening and dimming...
Brightening and dimming...
...and ﬁnally fading, fading, fading into ordinary moonlight that
seemed like pitch darkness by contrast.
Within the darkness of that moonlight stood a sallow man with his
hand outstretched in entreaty, and the skeleton of a woman, lying upon
the ﬂoor, a puzzled look upon her face.
And Harry, still invisible, fallen to his knees. The greater danger
had passed, and now Harry was just trying not to collapse, to keep the
spell going at the lower level. He’d drained something, hopefully not
lost something—he should have known, should have remembered, that
it wasn’t mere magic that fueled the Patronus Charm—
“Thank you, my Lord,” whispered the sallow man.
“Fool,” said the hard voice of a boy pretending to be a Dark Lord.
“Did I not warn you that the spell could prove fatal if you failed to control your emotions?”
* 860 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT I V

*
*

*

Professor Quirrell’s eyes did not widen, of course.
“Yes, my Lord, I understand,” said the Dark Lord’s servant in a faltering voice, and turned to Bellatrix—
She was already pushing herself oﬀ the ﬂoor, slowly, like an old, old
Muggle woman. “How funny,” Bellatrix whispered, “you were almost
killed by a Patronus Charm...” A giggle that sounded like it was blowing
dust out of her giggle pipes. “I could punish you, maybe, if my Lord
froze you in place and I had knives... maybe I can be useful after all?
Oh, I feel a little better now, how strange...”
“Be silent, dear Bella,” Harry said in a chill voice, “until I give you
leave to speak.”
There was no reply, which was obedience.
The servant levitated the human skeleton, and made her invisible
once more, followed shortly by his own disappearance with the sound
of another cracking egg.
They passed on through the corridors of Azkaban.
And Harry knew that as they passed, the prisoners were stirring in
their cells as the fear lifted for one precious moment, maybe even feeling
a small touch of healing as his light passed them by, and then collapsing
down again as the cold and darkness pressed back in.
Harry was trying very hard not to think about it.
Otherwise his Patronus would wax until it burned away every Dementor in Azkaban, blazing bright enough to destroy them even at this
distance...
Otherwise his Patronus would wax until it burned away every Dementor in Azkaban, taking all of Harry’s life as fuel.

**
*
In the Auror’s quarters at the top of Azkaban, one Auror trio was snoring in the barracks, one Auror trio was resting in the breakroom, and one
Auror trio was on duty in the command room, keeping their watch. The
command room was simple but large, with three chairs at back where
*

861

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

three Aurors sat, their wands always in hand to sustain their three Patronuses, as the bright white forms paced in front of the open window,
sheltering them all from the Dementors’ fear.
The three of them usually stuck to the back, and played poker, and
didn’t look out the window. You could have seen some sky there, sure,
and there was even an hour or two every day where you could’ve seen
some sun, but that window also looked down on the central pit of hell.
Just in case a Dementor wanted to ﬂoat up and talk to you.
There was no way that Auror Li would have agreed to serve duty
here, triple pay or no triple pay, if he hadn’t had a family to support.
(His real name was Xiaoguang, and everyone called him Mike instead;
he’d named his children Su and Kao, which hopefully would serve them
better.) His only consolation, besides the money, was that at least his
mates played an excellent game of Dragon Poker. Though it would be
hard not to, at this point.
It was their 5,366th game and Li had what would probably be his
best hand of the 5300s. It was a Saturday in February and there were
three players, which let him shift the suit of any one hole card except
a two, three, or seven; and that was enough to let him build a Corps-aCorps with Unicorns, Dragons, and sevens...
Across the table from him, Gerard McCusker looked up from the
table cards toward the direction of the window, staring.
The sinking feeling came over Li’s stomach with surprising speed.
If his seven of hearts got hit by a Dementor Modiﬁer and turned into
a six, he was going straight down to two pair and McCusker might beat
that—
“Mike,” said McCusker, “what’s with your Patronus?”
Li turned his head and looked.
His soft silver badger had turned away from its watch over the pit
and was staring downward at something only it could see.
A moment later, Bahry’s moonlit duck and McCusker’s bright
anteater followed suit, staring in the same downward direction.
They all exchanged glances, and then sighed.
“I’ll tell them,” said Bahry. Protocol called for sending the three Aurors who were oﬀ-duty but not sleeping to investigate anything anoma*

862 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT I V

*
*

*

lous. “Maybe relieve one of them and take the C spiral, if you two don’t
mind.”
Li exchanged a glance with McCusker, and they both nodded. It
wasn’t too hard to break into Azkaban, if you were wealthy enough to
hire a powerful wizard, and well-intentioned enough to recruit someone
who could cast the Patronus Charm. People with friends in Azkaban
would do that, break in just to give someone a half-day’s worth of Patronus time, a chance at some real dreams instead of nightmares. Leave
them a supply of chocolate to conceal in their cell, to increase the chance
they lived through their sentence. And the Aurors on guard... well, even
if you got caught, you could probably convince the Aurors to overlook
it, in exchange for the right bribe.
For Li, the right bribe tended to be in the range of two Knuts and a
silver Sickle. He hated this place.
But Bahry One-Hand had a wife and the wife had healer’s bills, and if
you could aﬀord to hire someone who could break into Azkaban, then
you could aﬀord to grease Bahry’s remaining palm pretty hard, if he was
the one who caught you.
By unspoken agreement, none of them giving them anything away
by being the ﬁrst to propose it, the three of them ﬁnished out their poker
hand ﬁrst. Li won, since no Dementors had actually shown up. And by
then the Patronuses had stopped staring and gone back to their normal
patrol, so it was probably nothing, but procedure was procedure.
After Li raked in the pot, Bahry gave them all formal nods, and stood
up from the table. The older man’s long white locks brushed against his
fancy red robes, his robes brushed the metal ﬂoor of the command room,
as Bahry went through the separating door that led to the formerly oﬀduty Aurors.
Li had been Sorted into Huﬄepuﬀ, and he sometimes felt a little
queasy about this kind of business. But Bahry had shown them all the
pictures, and you had to let a man do what he could for his poor sick wife,
especially when he only had seven months left before his retirement.

**
*
*

863 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

The faint green spark ﬂoated through the metal corridors, and the silver
humanoid, seeming a little dimmer now, followed after it. Sometimes
the bright ﬁgure would ﬂare, especially when they passed one of the huge
metal doors, but it always died back down again.
Mere eyes could not have seen the invisible others: the eleven-yearold Boy-Who-Lived, and the living skeleton that was Bellatrix Black,
and the Polyjuiced Defense Professor of Hogwarts, all traveling together
through Azkaban. If that was the beginning of a joke, Harry didn’t
know the punchline.
They’d gone up another four ﬂights of stairs before the rough voice of
the Defense Professor said, simply and without emphasis, “Auror coming.”
It took too long, a whole second maybe, for Harry to understand, for
the jolt of adrenaline to pump into his blood, and for him to remember
what Professor Quirrell had already discussed with him and told him to
do in this case, and then Harry spun on his heel and ﬂew back the way
they’d come.
Harry reached the ﬂight of stairs, and frantically laid himself down
on the third step from the top, the cold metal feeling hard even through
his cloak and robes. Trying to move his head up, to peer over the lip
of the stairs, showed that he couldn’t see Professor Quirrell; and that
meant that Harry was out of the line of any stray ﬁre.
His shining Patronus followed after him, and lay down beside him
on the step just beneath him; for it too must not be seen.
There was a faint sound as of wind or whooshing, and then the sound
of Bellatrix’s invisible body coming to rest on a stair further below, she
had no place in this except—
“Stay still,” said the cold high whisper, “stay silent.”
There was stillness, and silence.
Harry pressed his wand against the side of the metal step just above
him. If he was anyone else he would have needed to take a Knut out of
his pocket... or rip oﬀ a bit of cloth from his robe... or bite oﬀ one of
his nails... or ﬁnd a speck of rock large enough that he could see it and
solid enough to stay in one place and orientation while it touched his
wand. But with Harry’s almighty power of partial Transﬁguration, this
*

864 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT I V

*
*

*

was not necessary; he could skip that particular step of the operation
and use any material near to hand.
Thirty seconds later Harry was the proud new owner of a curved
mirror, and...
“Wingardium Leviosa,” Harry whispered as quietly as he could.
...was levitating it just above the steps, and watching, in that curved
surface, almost the whole corridor where Professor Quirrell invisibly
waited.
Harry heard it in the distance, then, the sound of footsteps.
And saw the form (a little hard to see in the mirror) of a person in red
robes, coming down the stairs, entering the seemingly empty corridor;
accompanied by a small Patronus animal that Harry couldn’t quite make
out.
The Auror was protected by a blue shimmer, it was hard to see the
details but Harry could see that much, the Auror had shields already
raised and strengthened.
Crap, thought Harry. According to the Defense Professor, the essential art of dueling consisted of trying to put up defenses that would block
whatever someone was likely to throw at you, while trying in turn to attack in ways that were likely to go past their current set of defenses. And
by far the easiest way to win any sort of real ﬁght—Professor Quirrell
had said this over and over—was to shoot the enemy before they raised a
shield in the ﬁrst place, either from behind or from close enough range
that they couldn’t dodge or counter in time.
Though Professor Quirrell might still be able to get in a shot from
behind, if—
But the Auror halted after taking three steps into the corridor.
“Nice Disillusionment,” said a hard male voice that Harry didn’t recognize. “Now show yourself, or you’ll be in real trouble.”
The form of the sallow, bearded man became visible then.
“And you with the Patronus,” said the hard voice. “Come out too.
Now.”
“Wouldn’t be smart,” said the gravelly voice of the sallow man. It was
no longer the terriﬁed voice of the Dark Lord’s servant; it had suddenly
become the professional intimidation of a competent criminal. “You
*

865 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

don’t want to see who’s behind me. Trust me, you don’t. Five hundred
Galleons, cold cash up front, if you turn around and walk away. Big
trouble for your career if you don’t.”
There was a long pause.
“Look, whoever you are,” said the hard voice. “You seem confused
about how this works. I don’t care if that’s Lucius Malfoy behind you
or Albus bloody Dumbledore. You all come out, I scan the whole lot
of you, and then we talk about how much this is going to cost you—”
“Two thousand Galleons, ﬁnal oﬀer,” said the gravelly voice, taking
on a warning undertone. “That’s ten times the going rate and more than
you make in a year. And believe me, if you see something you shouldn’t,
you’re going to regret not taking that—”
“Shut it!” said the hard voice. “You’ve got exactly ﬁve seconds to
drop that wand before I drop you. Five, four—”
What are you doing, Professor Quirrell? Harry thought frantically.
Attack ﬁrst! Cast a shield at least!
“—three, two, one! Stupefy!”

**
*
Bahry stared, a chill running down his spine.
The man’s wand had moved so fast that it was like it had Apparated
into place, and Bahry’s stunner was currently sparkling tamely at the
end of it, not blocked, not countered, not deﬂected, caught like a ﬂy in
honey.
“My oﬀer has gone back down to ﬁve hundred Galleons,” said the
man in a colder, more formal voice. He smiled dryly, and the smile
looked wrong on that bearded face. “And you shall need to accept a
Memory Charm.”
Bahry had already swapped the harmonics on his shields so that his
own stunner couldn’t pass back through, already tilted his wand back
into a defensive position, already raised his hardened artiﬁcial hand into
position to block anything blockable, and was already thinking wordless
spells to put more layers on his shields—
*

866 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT I V

*
*

*

The man wasn’t looking at Bahry. Instead he was poking curiously
at Bahry’s stunner where it still wavered on the end of his wand, drawing
out red sparks and ﬂicking them away with his ﬁngers, slowly disassembling the hex like a child’s rod puzzle.
The man hadn’t raised any shields of his own.
“Tell me,” the man said in a disinterested voice that didn’t seem to
quite ﬁt the rough throat—Polyjuice, Bahry would have called it, if he’d
thought that anyone could possibly do magic that delicate from inside
someone else’s body—“what did you do in the last war? Put yourself in
harm’s way, or stay out of trouble?”
“Harm’s way,” said Bahry. His voice kept the iron calm of an Auror
with nearly a hundred full years on the force, seven months short of
mandatory retirement, Mad-Eye Moody couldn’t have said it with any
more hardness.
“Fight any Death Eaters?”
Now a grim smile graced Bahry’s own face. “Two at once.” Two
of You-Know-Who’s own warrior-assassins, personally trained by their
dark master. Two Death Eaters at once against Bahry alone. It had been
the toughest ﬁght of Bahry’s life, but he’d stood his ground, and walked
away with only the loss of his left hand.
“Did you kill them?” The man sounded idly curious, and he continued to draw threads of ﬁre out of the much-diminished stunbolt still
captive on the end of his wand, his ﬁngers now weaving small patterns
of Bahry’s own magic before ﬂicking to disperse them.
Sweat broke out on Bahry’s skin beneath his robes. His metal hand
ﬂashed downward, ripped the mirror from his belt—“Bahry to Mike, I
need backup!”
There was a pause, and silence.
“Bahry to Mike!”
The mirror lay dull and lifeless in his hand. Slowly, Bahry put it back
on his belt.
“It’s been quite a while since I had a serious ﬁght with a serious opponent,” the man said, still not looking up at Bahry. “Try not to disappoint
me too much. You can attack whenever you’re ready. Or you can walk
away with ﬁve hundred Galleons.”
*

867 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

There was a long silence.
Then the air screamed like metal cutting glass as Bahry slashed his
wand downward.

**
*
Harry could hardly see it, could hardly make out anything amid the
lights and ﬂashes, his mirror’s curve was perfect (they’d practiced that
tactic before in the Chaos Legion) but the scene was still too small, and
Harry had the feeling he wouldn’t be able to understand even if he was
watching from a meter away, it was all happening too fast, red blasts deﬂecting from blue shields, green bars of light clashing together, shadowy
forms appearing and vanishing, he couldn’t even tell who was casting
what, except that the Auror was shouting incantation after incantation
and frantically dodging while Professor Quirrell’s Polyjuiced form stood
in one place and ﬂicked his wand, mostly silently, but now and then pronouncing words in unrecognizable languages that would white out the
whole mirror and show half the Auror’s shielding torn away as he staggered back.
Harry had seen exhibition duels between the strongest seventh-year
students, and this was so far above it that Harry’s mind felt numbed,
looking at how far he had left to go. There wasn’t a single seventh-year
student who could have lasted half a minute against the Auror, all three
seventh-year armies put together might not be able to scratch the Defense
Professor...
The Auror had fallen to the ground, one knee and one hand supporting himself as the other hand gestured frantically, the few shouted
incantations that Harry recognized were all shield spells, as a ﬂock of
shadows spun around the Auror like a whirlwind of razors.
And Harry saw Professor Quirrell’s Polyjuiced form deliberately
point his wand at where the Auror kneeled and fought the last moments
of his battle.
“Surrender,” said the gravelly voice.
The Auror spat something unspeakable.
“So be it,” said the voice. “Avada—”
*

868 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT I V

*
*

*

Time seemed to move very slowly, like there was time to hear the individual syllables, Ke, and Da, and Vra, time to watch the Auror starting
to throw himself desperately aside; and even though it was all happening
so slowly, somehow there wasn’t time to do anything, no time for Harry
to open his lips and scream NO, no time to move, maybe even not any
time to think.
Only time for one desperate wish that an innocent man should not
die—
And a blazing silver ﬁgure stood before the Auror.
Stood there just a fraction of a second before the green light struck
home.

**
*
Bahry was twisting frantically aside, not knowing if he was going to
make it—
His eyes were focused on his opponent and his onrushing death, so
Bahry only brieﬂy saw the outline of the brilliant silhouette, the Patronus brighter than any he’d ever seen, saw it just barely long enough
to recognize the impossible shape, before the green and the silver light
collided and both lights vanished, it was impossible but both lights vanished, the Killing Curse had been blocked, and then Bahry’s ears were
pierced as he saw his terrible opponent screaming, screaming, screaming, clutching at his head and screaming, starting to fall as Bahry was
already falling—
Bahry hit the ground, falling from his own frantic lunge, and his dislocated left shoulder and broken rib screamed in protest. Bahry ignored
the pain, managed to scramble back to his knees, brought up his wand
to stun his opponent, he didn’t understand what was happening but he
knew that this was his only chance.
“Stupefy!”
The red bolt struck out toward the man’s falling body, and was torn
apart in midair and dissipated—and not by any shield. Bahry could see
it, the wavering in the air that surrounded his fallen and screaming opponent.
*

869 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

Bahry could feel it like a deadly pressure on his skin, the ﬂux of
magic building and building and building toward some terrible breaking
point. His instincts screamed at him to run before the explosion came,
this was no Charm, no Curse, this was wizardry run wild, but before
Bahry could even ﬁnish getting to his feet—
The man threw his wand away from himself (he threw away his
wand!) and a second later, his form blurred and vanished entirely.
A green snake lay motionless on the ground, unmoving even before
Bahry’s next stunner spell, ﬁred in sheer reﬂex, hit it without resistance.
As the dreadful ﬂux and pressure began to dissipate, as the wild wizardry died back down, Bahry’s dazed mind noticed that the scream was
continuing. Only it sounded diﬀerent, like the scream of a young boy,
coming from the stairs leading down to the next lower level.
That scream choked oﬀ too, and then there was silence except for
Bahry’s frantic panting.
His thoughts were slow, confused, disarrayed. His opponent had
been insanely powerful, that hadn’t been a duel, it had been like his ﬁrst
year as a trainee Auror trying to ﬁght Madam Tarma. The Death-Eaters
hadn’t been a tenth that good, Mad-Eye Moody wasn’t that good... and
who, what, how in the name of Merlin’s balls had anyone blocked a
Killing Curse?
Bahry managed to summon the energy to press his wand against his
rib, mutter the healing spell, and then press it again to his shoulder. It
took more out of him than it should have, took far too much out of
him, his magic was within a bare breath of utter exhaustion; he didn’t
have anything left for his minor cuts and bruises or even to reinforce the
scraps left of his shielding. It was all he could do not to let his Patronus
go out.
Bahry breathed deeply, heavily, steadied his breath as much as he
could before he spoke.
“You,” Bahry said. “Whoever you are. Come out.”
There was silence, and it occurred to Bahry that whoever it was
might be unconscious. He didn’t understand what had just happened,
but he’d heard the scream...
Well, there was one way to test that.
*

870 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT I V

*
*

*

“Come out,” said Bahry, making his voice harder, “or I start using
area-eﬀect curses.” He probably couldn’t have managed one if he’d tried.
“Wait,” said a boy’s voice, a young boy’s voice, high and thin and
wavering, like someone was holding back exhaustion or tears. The voice
now seemed to be coming from closer to hand. “Please wait. I’m—
coming out—”
“Drop the invisibility,” growled Bahry. He was too tired to bother
with anti-Disillusionment Charms.
A moment later, a young boy’s face emerged from within an unfolding invisibility cloak, and Bahry saw the black hair, the green eyes, the
glasses, and the angry red lightning-bolt scar.
If he’d had twenty fewer years of experience under his belt he might
have blinked. Instead he just spat something that he probably shouldn’t
ought to say in front of the Boy-Who-Lived.
“He, he,” the boy’s wavering voice said, his young face looked frightened and exhausted and tears were still trickling down his cheeks, “he
kidnapped me, to make me cast my Patronus... he said he’d kill me if I
didn’t... only I couldn’t let him just kill you...”
Bahry’s mind was still dazed, but things were slowly starting to click
into place.
Harry Potter, the only wizard ever to survive a Killing Curse. Bahry
might have been able to dodge the green death, he’d certainly been trying, but if the matter came up before the Wizengamot, they’d rule it was
a life debt to a Noble House.
“I see,” Bahry said in a much gentler growl. He started to walk toward the boy. “Son, I’m sorry for what you’ve been through, but I need
you to drop the cloak and drop your wand.”
The rest of Harry Potter emerged from invisibility, showing the
sweat-soaked blue-trimmed Hogwarts robes, and his right hand clutching an eleven-inch holly wand so hard his knuckles were white.
“Your wand,” Bahry repeated.
“Sorry,” whispered the eleven-year-old boy, “here,” and he held out
the wand toward Bahry.
Bahry barely stopped himself from snarling at the traumatized boy
who’d just saved his life. Instead he overrode the impulse with a sigh,
*

871

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

and just stretched out a hand to take the wand. “Look, son, you’re really
not supposed to point a wand at—”
The wand’s end twisted lightly beneath Bahry’s hand just as the boy
whispered, “Somnium.”

**
*
Harry stared at the Auror’s crumpled body, there was no sense of triumph, just a crushing sense of despair.
(Even then it might not have been too late.)
Harry turned to look at where the green snake lay motionless.
“Teacher?” hissed Harry. “Friend? Pleasse, are you alive?” An awful
fear was taking hold in Harry’s heart; in that moment he had entirely
forgotten that he’d just seen the Defense Professor try to kill a police
oﬃcer.
Harry pointed his wand at the snake, and his lips even began to shape
the word Innervate, before his brain caught up with him and screamed
at him.
He couldn’t use magic on Professor Quirrell.
Couldn’t ever use magic on Professor Quirrell.
Harry had felt it, the burning, tearing pain in his head, like his brain
was about to split in half. He’d felt it, his magic and Professor Quirrell’s
magic, matched and anti-harmonized in a fulﬁllment of doom. That was
the mysterious terrible thing that would happen if Harry and Professor
Quirrell ever got too close to each other, or if they ever cast magic on
each other, or if their spells ever touched, their magic would resonate out
of control—
Harry stared at the snake, he couldn’t tell if it was breathing.
(The last seconds ticked away.)
He turned to stare at the Auror, who had seen the Boy-Who-Lived,
who knew.
The full magnitude of the disaster crushed in on Harry like a thousand hundred-ton weights, he’d managed to stun the Auror but now
there was nothing left to do, no way to recover, the mission had failed,
everything had failed, he had failed.
*

872 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT I V

*
*

*

Shocked, dismayed, despairing, he didn’t think of it, didn’t see the obvious, didn’t remember where the hopeless feelings were coming from,
didn’t realize that he still needed to recast the True Patronus Charm—
And then it was already too late.

**
*
Auror Li and Auror McCusker had rearranged their chairs around the
table, and so they both saw it at the same time, the naked, skeletally
thin horror rising up to hover outside the window, the headache already
hitting them from seeing it.
They both heard the voice, like a long-dead corpse had spoken words
and those words themselves had aged and died.
The Dementor’s speech hurt their ears as it said, “Bellatrix Black is
out of her cell.”
There was a split second of horriﬁed silence, and then Li tore out of
his chair, heading for the communicator to call in reinforcements from
the Ministry, even as McCusker grabbed his mirror and started frantically trying to raise the three Aurors who’d gone on patrol.

*

873 *

CHAPTER

FIFT Y-FI V E

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART V
,
n a scarred and ruined corridor, lit by dim gas lights, a boy slowly
crept forward, one hand stretched out, toward the unmoving snake
that was the body of his teacher.
Harry was only a meter away from the snake’s body when he ﬁrst
felt it, tickling at the edge of his perception.
Ever so weakly, a sense of doom...
Professor Quirrell was alive, then.
The thought engendered no feeling of joy, only a sort of empty despair.
Harry would still be caught soon, and no matter how he tried to
explain, it still wouldn’t look good. No one would trust him again, they
would think he was the next Dark Lord, they wouldn’t help him when
it came time to ﬁght Lord Voldemort, Hermione would give up on him,
probably even Dumbledore would look for another hero...
...maybe they’d just send him home to his parents.
He had failed.
Harry looked at the crumpled body of the police oﬃcer he’d
stunned, the already-drying blood from the minor cuts and slashes, the
burned places on the intricately embroidered red robes.
He’d been stupid. He shouldn’t have stunned the police oﬃcer,
should have just stayed with his original story about being kidnapped
by Professor Quirrell...
It might not be too late, whispered a voice inside him. You might still be
able to ﬁx your mistake. The Auror saw you, he remembers that you stunned

I

*

875 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

him... but if he were dead, if Professor Quirrell were dead, if Bellatrix were
dead, there would be no one to contradict your story.
Slowly, Harry’s hand started to rise, pointing his wand at the police
oﬃcer and—
Harry’s hand halted.
He had a distant sense he was behaving uncharacteristically of himself, somehow. Like there was something he’d forgotten, something important, but he was having trouble remembering what it was, exactly.
Oh. That was right. He was someone who believed in the value of
human life.
A sense of puzzlement accompanied the thought, he couldn’t quite
remember why other people’s lives had seemed valuable...
All right, said the logical part of him, why has my mind changed between then and now?
Because he was in Azkaban...
And he’d forgotten to recast the Patronus Charm...
Doing anything at all, somehow, seemed like a tremendous eﬀort,
like the thought of action itself was a weight too heavy to lift; but it did
seem like a good idea to recast the Patronus Charm, for he was still able
to be afraid of Dementors. And though he couldn’t remember what it
was like to be happy, he knew that this wasn’t it.
Harry’s hand rose to hold his wand level before him, his ﬁngers took
the starting positions.
And then Harry paused.
He couldn’t... quite remember... what he’d used as his happy
thought.
That was odd, it had been something very important, he really ought
to be able to remember it... something to do with death? But that wasn’t
happy...
His body was shivering, Azkaban hadn’t seemed so cold before, and
it seemed to be getting colder even as he thought. It was too late for him,
he’d already sunk too far, he’d never be able to cast the Patronus Charm
now—
That may be the Dementation talking rather than an accurate estimate,
observed the logical part of himself, habits that had been encoded into
*

876 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT V

*
*

*

sheer reﬂex, requiring no energy to activate. Think of the Dementors’
fear as a cognitive bias, and try to overcome it the way you would overcome
any other cognitive bias. Your hopeless feelings may not indicate that the
situation is actually hopeless. It may only indicate that you are in the presence
of Dementors. All negative emotions and pessimistic estimates must now be
considered suspect, fallacious until proven valid.
(If you’d been watching the boy as he thought, you would have seen
a distant, abstract, puzzled frown move across his face, below the glasses
and the lightning-bolt scar. His hand stayed in the starting position for
the Patronus Charm, and did not move.)
The presence of Dementors interferes with the part of you that processes
happiness. If you cannot retrieve your happy thought by mnemonic association on the key of happiness, perhaps you can get at the memory some
other way instead. When was the last time you talked to someone about the
Patronus Charm?
Harry couldn’t seem to remember that either.
A crushing wave of despair swept over him, and was dismissed by
the logical part of himself as untrustworthy, external, not-Harry, the
dull weight still pressed him down but his mind went on thinking, it
didn’t take much eﬀort to think...
When was the last time you talked to someone about Dementors?
Professor Quirrell had said that he was already able to feel the presence of Dementors, and Harry had said to Professor Quirrell... he’d told
Professor Quirrell...
...to hold to the memory of the stars, of falling bodilessly through
space, like an Occlumency barrier across his entire mind.
His second Defense class of the year, on Friday, that was when Professor Quirrell had shown him the stars, and again on Christmas.
It didn’t take much eﬀort to remember them, the searing points of
white against perfect blackness.
Harry remembered the great cloudy wash of the Milky Way.
Harry remembered the peace.
Some of the coldness at the fringes of his limbs seemed to retreat.
There were words he had spoken out loud on the day he’d ﬁrst
cast the Patronus Charm, his mind could remember the sounds and the
*

877 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

speech even as the feelings seemed distant...
...I thought of my absolute rejection of death as the natural order.
You cast the True Patronus Charm by thinking about the value of
human life.
...But there are other lives that are still alive to be fought for. Your life,
and my life, and Hermione Granger’s life, all the lives of Earth, and all the
lives beyond, to be defended and protected.
Then the idea of killing everyone... that hadn’t been his true self, that
had been the Dementation talking...
Despair was the Dementors’ inﬂuence.
Where there’s life, there’s hope. The Auror is still alive. Professor Quirrell
is still alive. Bellatrix is still alive. I’m still alive. No one’s actually died yet...
Harry could picture the Earth, now, in the midst of the starﬁeld, the
blue-white orb.
...and I won’t let them!
“Expecto Patronum!”
The words came out a litttle halting, and when the human shape
burst back into existence it was dim at ﬁrst, moonlight instead of sunlight, white instead of silver.
But it strengthened, slowly, as Harry breathed in deliberate rhythm,
recovering. Letting the light drive back the darkness from his mind.
Remembering the things that he had almost forgotten, and channeling
them back into the Patronus Charm.
Even when the light blazed full and silver once more, illuminating
the corridor more brightly than the gas lamps, banishing fully the cold,
Harry’s limbs still shook. That had been too close.
Harry took a deep breath. All right. It was time to reconsider the situation now that his thoughts were no longer being artiﬁcially darkened
by Dementors.
Harry reviewed the situation.
...still looked pretty hopeless, actually.
It wasn’t the crushing despair of before, but Harry still felt wobbly,
to put it mildly. He didn’t dare go dark and it was his dark side that had
the ability to take this level of problem in stride. It was his dark side
that would have laughed scornfully at the very concept of giving up just
*

878 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT V

*
*

*

because he’d lost Professor Quirrell and was marooned in the depths of
Azkaban and had been seen by a police oﬃcer. The ordinary Harry was
not able to take that sort of thing in stride.
But there wasn’t any option except to keep moving forward anyway.
You couldn’t get any more pointless than giving up before you’d actually
lost.
Harry looked around.
Dim gas lights lit a corridor of grey metal, whose sides and ﬂoor and
ceiling were slashed in places, gouged and melted, telling anyone who
cared to look that there had been battle here.
Professor Quirrell could have repaired it easily enough, if he’d...
The sense of betrayal struck Harry with full force, then.
Why... why did he... why...
Because he’s evil, said Gryﬃndor and Huﬄepuﬀ, quietly and sadly.
We told you so.
No! thought Harry desperately. No, it doesn’t make sense, we were
going to commit the perfect crime, the Auror could have been Obliviated,
the corridor repaired, it wasn’t too late but it would have been too late if he’d
died!
But Professor Quirrell was never really planning to commit the perfect
crime, said the grim voice of Slytherin. He wanted the crime to be noticed.
He wanted everyone to know that someone had killed an Auror and broken
Bellatrix Black out of Azkaban. He would have prepared some kind of evidence, some proof he could reveal of your involvement, to use as blackmail
against you; and you would have been bound to him forever.
Harry’s Patronus almost went out, then.
No... Harry thought.
Yes, said the other three parts of him sadly.
No. It still doesn’t make sense. Professor Quirrell had to know I would
turn against him the instant I saw him kill an Auror. That I might very well
go ahead and confess to Dumbledore, hoping to plead the true fact that I was
tricked. And... in terms of blackmail, does his killing an Auror against my
will, really add all that much to breaking Bellatrix out of Azkaban with my
willing help? It would have been more cunning to keep the evidence of my
involvement with the basic crime, but still pretend to be my ally for as long
*

879 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

as he could, saving the blackmail to use only if it became necessary...
Rationalization, said Slytherin. So why did Professor Quirrell do it,
then?
And Harry thought with a tinge of desperation—knowing, even as
he thought it, that he was motivated in part by a desire to reject reality,
and that wasn’t how the technique was meant to be wielded—I notice that
I am confused.
There was internal silence. None of the parts of himself seemed to
have anything to add to that.
And Harry continued to take stock of the situation.
Did Harry need to re-evaluate the probability that Bellatrix was evil?
...not in any mission-relevant sense. It was a given that Bellatrix was
currently evil. Whether she was an innocent who’d been made that way
by torture and Legilimency and unspeakable rituals, or whether she’d
chosen it of her own will, didn’t have much bearing on the current situation. The key fact was that while Bellatrix thought Harry was the Dark
Lord, she would obey him.
That was one resource, then. But Bellatrix was starved and ninetenths dead...
‘Oh, I feel a little better now, how strange...’
Bellatrix had said that, in her shattered voice, after Harry’s Patronus
had blazed out of control.
Harry thought, and he couldn’t have quite said why he thought this,
it might have just been his own mind making things up, but... it seemed
likely that what the Dementors had taken from you long ago was lost
forever. But what the Dementors had taken from you recently, the True
Patronus Charm might give back. Like the diﬀerence between emptying
a cup, and the unused cup fading away. Bellatrix, then, might have got
back what she’d lost in just the last week or so. Not any happy memories, those would have been eaten years ago. But whatever strength and
magic had been drained from her in just the last week, she might have
regained. Like the equivalent of getting a week of rest, a week to build
up her magic again...
Harry looked at Professor Quirrel’s snake form.
...maybe enough for an Innervate.
* 880 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT V

*
*

*

If awakening Professor Quirrell was, in fact, a smart thing to do.
Some of the despair came back to Harry, then. He couldn’t trust
Professor Quirrell, couldn’t trust that reviving him would be wise, not
after what had just happened.
Steady, Harry thought to himself, and looked at the crumpled form
of the Auror.
Bellatrix might also be able to manage a Memory Charm.
That could be step one, anyway. It wasn’t exactly getting everyone safely out of Azkaban, and the Aurors would know afterward that
something strange had happened, they might suspect Bellatrix’s body
and perform an autopsy. But it was a step.
...and would it be all that hard to get out of Azkaban? If they could
get to the top of Azkaban quickly enough, before the Auror was supposed to report back in, before anyone noticed him missing, then they
could just ﬂy out through the hole Professor Quirrell had made, and get
far enough away from Azkaban to activate the portkey Harry already
had in his possession. (Both Professor Quirrell and Harry had portkeys,
and both were powerful enough to transport two humans, plus or minus
a snake. As with their doubly-concealed departure from Mary’s Room,
Professor Quirrell had put enough safety margin in his plans to impress
even Harry.)
Bellatrix could carry Professor Quirrell’s snake form, which Harry
dared not touch or levitate.
Harry turned and strode quickly toward where Bellatrix was waiting
on the stairs. He could feel his spirits reviving a little. It was starting to
look like a good plan, and there was no time to waste in going about it.
What to do with Professor Quirrell, or for that matter Bellatrix, after the portkey took them to where they were supposed to hand Bellatrix over to Professor Quirrell’s trusted psychiatric healer... well, Harry
could work that out along the way. Harry would probably have to
bamboozle the healer into doing something—which was going to take
one hell of a bamboozling, and Harry wasn’t even sure what he wanted
done—but he and Bellatrix had to get moving now.
The main problem Harry saw, as he quickly ran the whole process
forward in his imagination, would come when they reached the roof.
*

881 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

Professor Quirrell had been supposed to sneak around invisibly and
Confund the monitors that would notice visitors in the aerial surroundings of Azkaban, causing them to see a repeating loop of scenery for a
few minutes. Professor Quirrell had said that he couldn’t Disillusion
Harry’s Patronus; and if they switched oﬀ the Patronus, the Dementors
would notice Bellatrix was missing, and alert the Aurors...
Harry’s train of thought stumbled.
There were times when ‘Aw, crap’ just didn’t seem to cover it.

**
*
Li’s hands were sure despite the adrenaline, as he unlocked the bars on
the Vanishing Cabinet that linked Azkaban to a well-guarded room in
the interior of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement. (A oneway Vanishing Cabinet, of course. The wards permitted a few fast ways
into Azkaban, all of them well-guarded, and no fast ways out.)
Li stepped well back, pointed his wand at the Cabinet, spoke the
incantation “Harmonia Nectere Passus”, and not a second later—
The door of the Cabinet burst open with a bang, and into the room
strode a heavy-set, square-jawed witch with greyed hair cropped close
around her head. She wore no rank signs as she wore no jewelry or
other ornamentation, it was only an ordinary Auror’s robes that she
deemed ﬁt to grace herself: Director Amelia Bones, head of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement and said to be the only witch in the
dmle who could take Mad-Eye Moody in a fair ﬁght (not that either of
those two were the sort to ﬁght fairly). Li had heard rumors that Amelia
could Apparate within the bounds of the dmle, and this was the sort of
thing that gave rise to rumors like that, he’d called in the alarm not ﬁfty
seconds ago.
“Get into the air, now!” Amelia barked over her shoulder at the female Auror trio following behind her with police broomsticks, they
must have all been crushed in there, waiting for Li to activate the Cabinet. “I want more aerial coverage on this place! And make sure you
*

882 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT V

*
*

*

keep up your anti-Disillusionment Charms!” Then her head turned toward him. “Report, Auror Li! Do we know how they got in yet?”
Another Auror trio holding broomsticks materialized in the Vanishing Cabinet and strode out after them even as Li began talking.
They were followed by a trio of Hit Wizards in full battle gear.
Then another trio of Hit Wizards.
Then another broomstick team.

**
*
The emaciated form that was Bellatrix Black was resting motionless on
the stairs when Harry got there, eyes closed, and when Harry asked in
a cold, high whisper whether she was awake, he got no response.
A brief twitch of panic was countered by the thought that Professor
Quirrell had knocked her out to prevent her from hearing the Dark
Lord’s cringing servant suddenly turn into a hardened criminal and then
an expert battlemage. Which was good, because she wouldn’t have heard
Harry’s voice saying ‘Expecto Patronum’.
Harry drew back the hood of the Cloak, pointed his wand at Bellatrix, and whispered as gently as he could, “Innervate.”
From the way Bellatrix’s body jerked a little, Harry didn’t think he’d
managed to get it quite gentle enough.
The sunken dark eyes opened.
“Bella dear,” Harry said in his cold, high voice, “I am afraid we’ve
run into a bit of a problem. Have you recovered enough to do small
magics?”
There was a pause, and then Bellatrix’s pale head nodded.
“Very good,” Harry said dryly. “I won’t ask you to walk unaided,
Bella dear, but I am afraid you must walk.” He pointed his wand at her.
“Wingardium Leviosa.”
Harry kept the ﬂow of force down to something he could sustain for
a while, and it was still probably lifting two-thirds of her current body
weight. She was... thin.
*

883 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

Slowly, as though for the ﬁrst time in years, Bellatrix Black pushed
herself to her feet.

**
*
Amelia strode into the duty room, Auror Li and his silver badger following behind her. She’d spun her Time-Turner the moment she’d heard the
alarm, and then spent a tense hour preparing her forces for entry. You
couldn’t loop time within Azkaban itself, Azkaban’s future couldn’t interact with its past, so she hadn’t been able to arrive before the dmle had
gotten the message, but she should have arrived in time...
Her eyes went straight to the corpse, uncloaked and looking very
dead, ﬂoating beyond the viewing window.
“Where is Bellatrix Black?” Amelia demanded, showing no fear before the creature of fear.
Even her own blood froze for an instant, as the corpse parted its lips,
and gurgled, “Do not know.”

**
*
Harry watched, now fully invisible once more, as Bellatrix slowly leaned
down, took Professor Quirrell’s wand (which Harry dared not touch),
and slowly straightened again.
Then Bellatrix pointed the wand at the snake, and said, her voice
precise though it was still a whisper, “Innervate.”
The snake did not stir.
“Shall I try again, my Lord?” she whispered.
“No,” Harry said. He swallowed the sick feeling. Harry had decided
to say the hell with it and try to revive Professor Quirrell after he’d
realized that the Dementors had probably alerted the Aurors by now.
His high, cold voice went on, unperturbed, “Do you think you are able
to perform a Memory Charm, dear Bella?”
Bellatrix paused, and then said, hesitantly, “I think so, my Lord.”
“Eliminate that Auror’s last half-hour of memory,” Harry commanded. He’d thought a bit about whether he wanted to provide any justiﬁcation for that, what he would say if Bellatrix asked why they weren’t
*

884 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT V

*
*

*

just killing him, in which case Harry would explain that they were pretending to be a diﬀerent power group and then tell her to shut up—
But Bellatrix simply pointed her wand at the Auror, stood silently
for a time, and ﬁnally whispered, “Obliviate.”
She swayed, then, but did not fall.
“Very good, my dear Bella,” Harry said, and chuckled thinly. “And
I will ask you to carry that snake.”
Again, the woman said nothing, demanded no explanations, didn’t
ask why Harry or the apparently-invisible Patronus caster couldn’t do it.
She only staggered to where the long snake lay, slowly bent over, picked
it up, draped it over her shoulder.
(A tiny little part of Harry observed that it was very relaxing to have
a minion that would just follow orders so unquestioningly, and even
got as far as thinking that he could totally get used to having a minion
like Bellatrix, before that mind-fraction was screamed into silence by his
mortally oﬀended remainder.)
“Follow,” the boy commanded his minion, and began to walk.

**
*
It was starting to get crowded in the duty room, almost too crowded to
breathe, though there was still space around Amelia herself; if needing
to breathe meant that you had to crowd Director Bones, it was better
not to breathe.
Amelia looked at where Ora was ﬁddling with Auror McCusker’s
mirror. “Specialist Weinbach,” she barked, causing the young witch to
start. “Any response from One-Hand’s mirror?”
“None,” Ora said nervously, “it’s... I mean it has to be jammed, not
dead, carefully jammed because it didn’t set oﬀ the alarms, but the line
is so blank the mirror might as well be broken...”
Amelia didn’t let her expression change, though the part of her that
was already mourning One-Hand got a little sadder and a lot more angry.
Seven months, he’d had seven months left until his retirement after a
full century of service. She remembered him as an eager young Auror,
*

885 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

so very long ago, and his whole career he’d served the dmle with perfect
loyalty, at least when it came to anything really important...
Someone would burn for this.
The Dementor still hovered outside the window, casting its useless
shadow of dread over their operations; all the creature could do was gurgle its lack of knowledge or fail to reply at all, when asked questions like
‘Did Bellatrix Black escape?’ and ‘Why can’t you ﬁnd her?’ and ‘How is
she being hidden?’ Amelia was starting to worry that the criminals were
already gone, when—
“We found a hole in the roof over C spiral!” someone shouted from
the doorway. “Still open, ward circumventions still active!”
Amelia’s lips peeled back in a smile like a wolf opening its jaws to
eat.
Bellatrix Black was still in Azkaban.
And in Azkaban, Bellatrix Black would stay, forever.
She took a stride toward the window, ignoring the Dementor now,
and looked up at the sky above, to check with her own eyes the patrolling
broomsticks. She couldn’t see the whole sky from here, but she saw ten
brooms go past on a patrol pattern and that already ought to be enough
to catch anyone, though she fully meant to put every broom she could
in the air. Her Aurors were equipped with the fastest racing broom
currently on the market, the Nimbus 2000; no unsuccessful chases for
her people.
Amelia turned back from the window, and frowned. The room was
getting ridiculously crowded, and two thirds of these people didn’t need
to be here, they just wanted to be close to the center of the action. If there
was one thing Amelia couldn’t tolerate, it was people who did what they
wanted instead of what was needed.
“All right, you lot!” Amelia bellowed at them. “Stop hanging around
here and start securing the top level of each spiral! That’s right,” she said
to the looks of surprise, “all three! They could tunnel through a ﬂoor
or a ceiling to go between them, in case you hadn’t worked that out!
We’re going down level by level until we catch them! I’ll take C spiral,
Scrimgeour, you’re on B...” She paused, then, remembering that MadEye had retired last year, who could she... “Shacklebolt, you’re on the
*

886 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT V

*
*

*

A spiral, take with the strongest other ﬁghters here! Check every set of
cells you pass, look under blankets, do the full set of detection Charms in
every corridor! Nobody leaves Azkaban until the criminals are caught,
nobody! And...” People looked at Amelia in surprise as her voice trailed
oﬀ.
The criminals had invented some way to prevent the Dementors from
ﬁnding Bellatrix Black.
That ought to have been impossible.
It chilled her blood, contemplating that. It was like...
Amelia took a deep breath, and spoke once more, in a voice of steel
command. “And when you catch them, make bloody sure they’re the
real criminals and not our own people forced to take Polyjuice. Anyone
behaves oddly, check them for the Imperius Curse. Keep each other in
sight at all times. Don’t assume an Auror uniform is friendly if you don’t
recognize the face.” She turned to the communications specialist. “Tell
the broomsticks. If one of the brooms peels oﬀ for no reason, half of
them are to hunt it down while the rest keep patrolling. And change the
harmonics on everything changeable, they may have stolen our keys.”
Then back to the rest of the room. “No Auror is above suspicion unless
they have no family left to threaten.”
She saw it, the cold looks that came over the older faces, saw some
of the younger Aurors ﬂinch, and knew that they understood.
But she said it out loud, just to be sure.
“We’re ﬁghting the old Wizarding War today, everyone. Just because
You-Know-Who is dead doesn’t mean the Death Eaters have forgotten
his tricks. Now go!”

**
*
Harry walked in silence through the gas-lit grey corridor, invisible beside
Bellatrix and the silver shape following them, trying to think of a better
plan.
At ﬁrst, when he’d realized that the Aurors probably knew already,
and that moreover, Professor Quirrell wasn’t waking up...
His thoughts had frozen up there, for a second.
*

887 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

And then stayed frozen, even as he’d gotten himself and Bellatrix
heading downward, to buy as much time as possible; the Aurors, Harry
ﬁgured, would start at the top and move down level by level. The Aurors
could aﬀord to move slowly and securely; they knew their prey had no
way out.
Harry hadn’t been able to think of any way out.
Until Harry had said to himself, well, if it was just a war game, what
would General Chaos do?
From which an answer had followed instantly.
And then Harry had thought, but if it’s that easy, why hasn’t anyone
broken out of Azkaban before?
And after he’d realized the possible problem: Fine, what would General Chaos do about that?
Whereupon General Chaos had come up with an amendment to his
ﬁrst plan.
It was...
It was the most insanely Gryﬃndor thing Harry had ever...
So now he was trying to think of a better plan, and not having much
luck.
Picky picky picky, said Gryﬃndor. Who was complaining about not
having any plan one minute earlier? You should be glad we came up with
anything at all, Mister Now-We’re-Doomed.
“My Lord,” Bellatrix whispered haltingly, as she navigated the next
ﬂight of stairs downward, “am I going back to my cell, my Lord?”
Harry’s brain was distracted, so it took him that long to process the
words, and then another moment to process the horror, while Bellatrix
continued speaking.
“I would... please, my Lord, I would very much rather die,” her voice
said. And then, in a smaller voice, a whisper that was barely there, “but
I will go back if you ask it of me, my Lord...”
“We are not going back to your cell,” hissed Harry’s voice, on automatic. Nothing of what he felt was allowed to reach his face.
Um... said Huﬄepuﬀ. Did you seriously just think, ‘You ought to work
for me, I would appreciate you?’
A stone would respond to that kind of loyalty, Harry thought. Even if
* 888 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT V

*
*

*

I’m only getting it by mistake, I can’t help but—
She’s the Dark Lord’s loyal killer and torturer, and the supposed reason
she’s loyal is because an innocent girl was broken into pieces and used as raw
material to make her, said Huﬄepuﬀ. Did you forget?
If someone shows me that much loyalty, even by mistake, there’s a part
of me that can’t help but feel something. The Dark Lord must have been...
evil doesn’t seem like a strong enough word, he must have been empty... to
not appreciate her loyalty, artiﬁcial or not.
The better parts of Harry didn’t have much to say to that.
And that was when Harry heard it.
It was faint, and it grew louder with every step they took forward.
A woman’s voice, distant, indistinct.
His ears, automatically, strained to make out the words.
”...please don’t...”
”...didn’t mean...”
”...don’t die...”
Then his brain knew who he was hearing, and in almost the same
moment, ﬁgured out what he was hearing.
Because Professor Quirrell wasn’t there to keep the silence any more,
and Azkaban was not, in fact, silent.
Faint the woman’s voice, repeating, over and over:
“No, I didn’t mean it, please don’t die!”
“No, I didn’t mean it, please don’t die!”
It got louder with every step Harry took, he could hear the emotion
in the words now, the horror, the remorse, the desperation of...
“No, I didn’t mean it, please don’t die!”
...the woman’s worst memory, rehearsing over and over again...
“No, I didn’t mean it, please don’t die!”
...the murder that had sent her to Azkaban...
“No, I didn’t mean it, please don’t die!”
...where she was sentenced by the Dementors to watch whoever she’d
killed, die over and over again, in an inﬁnite repeating loop. She must
have been put in Azkaban recently, from the amount of life left in her
voice.
The thought came to Harry, then, that Professor Quirrell had passed
*

889 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

those doors, heard those sounds, and given not the slightest sign of disturbance; and Harry would have called it a positive proof of evil, if
Harry’s own lips hadn’t remained silent in the presence of Bellatrix, his
breathing regular, while something inside him screamed and screamed
and screamed.
The Patronus brightened, not out of control, but it brightened, with
every step Harry took forward.
It brightened further as Harry and Bellatrix descended the stairs, she
stumbled and Harry oﬀered her his left arm thrust outside the Cloak,
braving the sense of doom from being that close to the snake draped
around her neck. There was a surprised look on her face, but she accepted it, and said nothing.
It helped Harry, being able to help Bellatrix, but it wasn’t enough.
Not when he saw the huge metal door in the center of that level’s
corridor.
Not when they came closer, and the woman’s voice fell silent, because
there was a Patronus near her now, and she wasn’t reliving her worst
memory any more.
Good, said a voice inside him. That was step one.
Harry’s steps carried him inevitably forward toward the metal door.
And...
Now unlock the door—
...Harry kept walking...
What do you think you’re doing? Go back and get her out of there!
...kept walking...
Save her! What are you doing? You have to save her!
The portkey Harry was carrying could transport two humans, only
two, plus or minus a snake. If they’d had Professor Quirrell’s portkey
too... but they didn’t, Professor Quirrell’s human form was carrying
that, there was no way to get it... Harry could only save one person today, and there was only one person on the lowest level of Azkaban, in
the most desperate need...
“Don’t go!” The voice came in a scream from behind the metal door.
“No, no, no, don’t go, don’t take it away, don’t don’t don’t—”
There was a light in the corridor and it grew brighter.
* 890 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT V

*
*

*

“Please,” sobbed the woman’s voice, “please, I can’t remember my
children’s names any more—”
“Sit down, Bella,” Harry’s voice said, somehow he kept his voice in
a cold whisper, “I must deal with this,” the Hover Charm diminishing
and switching oﬀ even as Bella obediently sat down, her skeletal form
dark against the brightening air.
I’ll die, thought Harry.
The air went on brightening.
After all, it wasn’t a certainty that Harry would die.
It was just a probability of death, and weren’t some things worth a
probability of dying?
The air went on brightening, the greater Patronus was beginning to
form around him, the brilliant human shape was becoming indistinct
within the burning air, as Harry’s life went to feed the ﬁre.
If I wipe out the Dementors, then even if I live, they’ll know it was me,
that I was the one who did this... I’ll lose my support, lose the war...
Yeah? said the inner voice that was urging him on. After you destroy
all the Dementors in Azkaban? I’d think that’d tend to prove your credentials as a Light Lord, actually, so destroy the abominations, destroy them all
now—
The humanoid shape could no longer be seen as a separate entity.
The corridor couldn’t be seen.
Harry’s own body was invisible within the Cloak.
There was only a bodiless viewpoint within an inﬁnite expanse of
silver light.
Harry could feel the life leaving him, fueling the spell; far away, he
could feel the shadows of Death begin to fray.
I meant to accomplish more with my life than this... I was going to ﬁght
the Dark Lord, I was going to merge the wizarding and Muggle worlds...
Lofty goals seemed very distant, very abstract, compared to one
woman begging him for help, it wasn’t certain that Harry would ever
do anything more important than this one thing, this one thing that he
could do now and here.
And with what might have been his last breath, Harry thought:
There are other Dementors, probably other Azkabans... if I’m going to
*

891 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

do this, I should do it when I’m closer to the central pit, it will take less of
my life that way, which increases the probability that I’ll survive to destroy
other Dementors... even assuming this is the optimal thing to do, if there’s a
right time and place to do this, it isn’t now and here, it isn’t now and here!
What? said the other part of him indignantly, as it searched for a
counterargument that didn’t exist—
Slowly the light died back down, as Harry concentrated on that one
indisputable fact, the one obvious truth that they weren’t in the optimal
place, the time couldn’t be now...
Slowly the light died back down.
Part of Harry’s life ﬂowed back into him.
Part had been lost as radiation.
But Harry had enough left to stay on his feet, and keep the silver
human shape bright; and when his wand arm raised and his voice whispered “Wingardium Leviosa”, the magic ﬂowed obediently out of him
and helped Bellatrix to her feet. (For it wasn’t his magic he had expended,
it had never been his magic that fueled the Patronus Charm.)
I swear, Harry thought, breathing as regularly as he could in Bellatrix’s presence, while tears streamed down his invisible cheeks, I swear
upon my life and my magic and my art as a rationalist, I swear by everything I hold sacred and all my happy memories, I give my oath that someday
I will end this place, please, please may I be forgiven...
And the two of them walked on, as a murderess’s voice screamed and
begged someone to come back and save her.
There should have been more time, there should have been a ceremony, for Harry’s sacriﬁce of that piece of himself, but Bellatrix was
beside him and so Harry just had to keep on walking without a pause,
saying nothing, breathing evenly.
So Harry walked on, leaving another piece of himself behind. It
would dwell in this place and time forever, he knew. Even after Harry
came back someday with a company of other True Patronus casters and
they destroyed all the Dementors here. Even if he melted the triangular
building and burned the island low enough that the sea would wash over
it, leaving no trace that such a place as this had ever once existed. Even
then he wouldn’t get it back.
*

892 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT V

*
*

*

**
*
The ﬂock of luminous creatures stopped staring downward, and began
patrolling the metal corridor as if nothing had happened.
“Just like last time?” Director Bones snapped in the direction of Auror Li, and the young Auror replied, “Yes, ma’am.”
The Director ﬁred oﬀ another query to see if the Dementors could
now ﬁnd their target, and looked unsurprised to hear a negative reply a
few seconds later.
Emmeline Vance was feeling torn between her loyalties.
Emmeline wasn’t a member of the Order of the Phoenix any more,
they had disbanded after the end of the last war. And during the war,
she’d known, they’d all known, that Director Crouch had quietly approved of their oﬀ-the-books battle.
Director Bones wasn’t Crouch.
But they were hunting Bellatrix Black now, who had been a Death
Eater, and who was certainly being rescued by Death Eaters. Their Patronuses were behaving oddly—all the bright creatures stopping and staring oﬀ downward, before they’d gone back to following their masters.
And the Dementors couldn’t ﬁnd their target.
It seemed to her that this would be an extremely good time to consult
Albus Dumbledore.
Should she just suggest to Director Bones that they contact Dumbledore? But if Director Bones hadn’t contacted him already...
Emmeline wavered for a while, probably too long, and then ﬁnally
decided. The hell with it, she thought. We’re all on the same side, we need
to stick together whether Director Bones likes it or not.
At a thought, her silver sparrow ﬂuttered onto her shoulder.
“Drop behind us to guard our rear,” Emmeline murmured very
softly, almost without moving her lips, “wait until no one is looking
directly at you, then go to Albus Dumbledore. If he is not already by
himself, wait until he is. And tell him this: Bellatrix Black is breaking out of Azkaban, the Dementors cannot ﬁnd her, Director Bones is
hunting her, and our Patronuses are behaving oddly.”

*

893 *

CHAPTER

FIFT Y-SIX

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART VI:
,
CONSTRAINED
OPTIMIZATION
ilent, it was thankfully silent, the metal door on the next level down.
Either there wasn’t someone behind there, or they were hurting
quietly, maybe they were screaming but their voice had given out already,
or they were just muttering quietly to themselves in the dark...
I’m not sure I can do this, Harry thought, and he couldn’t blame the
despairing thought on the Dementors either. It would be better to be
lower, safer to be lower, his plan would take time to implement and the
Aurors were probably already working their way down. But if Harry
had to pass any more of those metal doors while staying silent and keeping his breathing perfectly regular, he might go mad; if he had to leave
a piece of himself behind at each one, soon there wouldn’t be anything
left of him—
A luminous moonlit cat leaped into existence and landed in front of
Harry’s Patronus. Harry almost screamed, which wouldn’t have helped
his image with Bellatrix.
“Harry!” said the voice of Professor McGonagall, sounding as
alarmed as Harry had ever heard from her. “Where are you? Are you
all right? This is my Patronus, answer me!”

S

*

895 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SIX

*
*

*

With a convulsive eﬀort, Harry cleared his mind, repurposed his
throat, forced calm, swapped in a diﬀerent personality like an Occlumency barrier. It took a few seconds and he hoped like hell that Professor McGonagall didn’t notice a problem with that thanks to the communications delay, just as he hoped like hell that Patronuses didn’t report
on their surroundings.
A young boy’s innocent voice said, “I’m in Mary’s Place, Professor,
in Diagon Alley. Going to the restroom actually. What’s wrong?”
The cat leaped away, and Bellatrix began to chuckle softly, dusty appreciative laughter, but she cut herself oﬀ abruptly at a hiss from Harry.
A moment later the cat returned, and said in Professor McGonagall’s
voice, “I’m coming to pick you up right now. Don’t go anywhere, if
you’re not around the Defense Professor don’t go back to him, don’t say
anything to anyone, I’ll be there as quickly as I can!”
And the bright cat blurred forward and vanished.
Harry glanced down at his watch, noting down the time, so that after
he got everyone out of here, and Professor Quirrell anchored the TimeTurner again, he could go back and be in the restroom of Mary’s Place
at the appropriate time...
You know, said the problem-solving part of his brain, there’s a limit to
how many constraints you can add to a problem before it really is impossible,
you know that?
It shouldn’t have mattered, and it didn’t really, it didn’t compare to
the suﬀering of a single prisoner in Azkaban, and yet Harry still found
himself feeling very aware that if his plan didn’t end with him being
picked up from Mary’s Place just like he’d never left, and the Defense
Professor looking completely innocent of any and all wrongdoing, Professor McGonagall was going to kill him.

**
*
As their team prepared to eat another bite of territory out of C spiral,
shielding and scanning before dispelling the previous shield to their rear,
*

896 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VI:
CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION

*
*

*

Amelia was tapping her ﬁngers on her hip and wondering if she ought
to consult the obvious expert. If only he wasn’t so—
Amelia heard the familiar crack of ﬁre and knew what she would see
as she turned.
A third of her Aurors were spinning around and leveling their wands
on the old wizard in half-moon glasses and a long silver beard who had
appeared directly within their midst, a bright red-golden phoenix on his
shoulder.
“Hold your ﬁre!” Polyjuice made it easy to forge the face, but faking the phoenix travel would have been rather more diﬃcult—the wards
permitted it as one of the fast ways into Azkaban, though there were no
fast ways out.
The old witch and the old wizard stared at each other for a long
moment.
(Amelia wondered, in the back of her mind, which of her Aurors
had sent the word, there were several former members of the Order of
the Phoenix with her; she tried to remember, in the back of her mind,
if she’d seen Emmeline’s sparrow or Andy’s cat missing from the ﬂock
of bright creatures; but she knew that it was futile. It might not even be
any of her people, for the old meddler often knew things he had no way
at all of knowing.)
Albus Dumbledore inclined his head to Amelia in a courteous gesture. “I hope I am not unwelcome here,” the wizard said calmly. “We
are all on the same side, are we not?”
“That depends,” Amelia said in a hard voice. “Are you here to help
us catch criminals, or to protect them from the consequences of their
actions?” Are you going to try to stop the killer of my brother from getting her
well-deserved Kiss, old meddler? From what Amelia heard, Dumbledore
had gotten smarter toward the end of the war, mostly due to Mad-Eye’s
nonstop nagging; but had relapsed into his foolish mercies the instant
Voldemort’s body was found.
A dozen small points of white and silver, reﬂections of the shining animals, gleamed oﬀ the old wizard’s half-moon glasses as he spoke. “Even
less than you would I see Bellatrix Black freed,” the old wizard said. “She
must not leave this prison alive, Amelia.”
*

897 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SIX

*
*

*

Before Amelia could speak again, even to express her surprised gratiﬁcation, the old wizard gestured with his long black wand and a blazing
silver phoenix sprang into existence, brighter perhaps than all their other
Patronuses put together. It was the ﬁrst time she’d seen that spell cast
wordlessly. “Order all your Aurors to cancel their Patronus Charms for
ten seconds,” said the old wizard. “What darkness cannot ﬁnd, the light
may.”
Amelia snapped oﬀ the order to the communications oﬃcer, who
would notify all Aurors through their mirrors, commanding Dumbledore’s will to be done.
That took a few moments, and it became a period of awful silence,
none of the Aurors daring to speak, while Amelia tried to weigh her
own thoughts. She must not leave this prison alive... Albus Dumbledore
wouldn’t turn into Bartemius Crouch without a strong reason. If he’d
meant to tell her why, he already would have; but it certainly wasn’t a
positive sign.
Still, it was good to know they’d be able to work together on this
one.
“Now,” said a chorus of mirrors, and all the Patronus Charms winked
out except that blazing silver phoenix.
“Is there another Patronus still present?” the old wizard said clearly
to the bright creature.
The bright creature dipped its head in a nod.
“Can you ﬁnd it?”
The silver head nodded again.
“Will you remember it, should it depart and come again?”
A ﬁnal nod from the blazing phoenix.
“It is done,” Dumbledore said.
“Over,” said all the mirrors a moment later, and Amelia raised her
wand and began recasting her own Patronus. (Though it took some extra
concentration, with that wolﬁsh smile already on her face, to think of
the ﬁrst time Susan had kissed her cheek, instead of dwelling on the
looming fate of Bellatrix Black. That other Kiss was a happy thought
indeed, but not quite the right kind for the Patronus Charm.)

*

898 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VI:
CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION

*
*

*

**
*
They hadn’t even gotten to the end of that corridor before Harry’s Patronus raised its hand, politely, as though in a classroom.
Harry thought quickly. The question was how to—no, that was also
obvious.
“It seems,” Harry said in a coldly amused voice, “that someone has
instructed this Patronus to speak its message only to me.” He chuckled.
“Well then. Pardon me, dear Bella. Quietus.”
At once the silver humanoid said in Harry’s own voice, “There is
another Patronus which seeks this Patronus.”
“What?” said Harry. And then, without pausing to think about what
was happening, “Can you block it? Stop it from ﬁnding you?”
The silver humanoid shook its head.

**
*
No sooner did Amelia and the other Aurors ﬁnish recasting their Patronus Charms, when—
The blazing silver phoenix ﬂew oﬀ, and the true red-golden phoenix
followed it, and the old wizard calmly strode after both of them with his
long wand gripped low.
The shields around their territory parted around the old wizard like
water, and closed behind him with hardly a ripple.
“Albus!” shouted Amelia. “What do you think you’re doing?”
But she already knew.
“Do not follow me,” the old wizard’s voice said sternly. “I can protect
myself, I cannot protect others.”
The curse Amelia shouted after him made even her own Aurors
ﬂinch.

**
*
This isn’t fair, isn’t fair, isn’t fair! There’s a limit to how many constraints
you can add to a problem before it really is impossible!
*

899 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SIX

*
*

*

Harry blocked oﬀ the useless thoughts, ignored the fatigue he was
feeling, and forced his mind to confront the new requirements, he had
to think fast, use the adrenaline on following the chains of logic quickly
and without hesitation, instead of wasting it on despair.
For the mission to succeed,
(1) Harry would have to dispel his Patronus.
(2) Bellatrix needed to be hidden from the Dementors after the Patronus was dispelled.
(3) Harry needed to resist the Dementors’ drain after his Patronus
was dispelled.
...
If I solve this one, said Harry’s brain, I want a cookie afterward, and if
you make the problem any more diﬃcult than this, I mean the slightest bit
more diﬃcult, I am climbing out of your skull and heading for Tahiti.
Harry and his brain considered the problem.
Azkaban had stood invincible for centuries, relying upon the impossibility of evading the Dementors’ gaze. So if Harry found another way
to hide Bellatrix from the Dementors, it would rely on either his scientiﬁc knowledge or his realization that the Dementors were Death.
Harry’s brain suggested that an obvious way to stop the Dementors
from seeing Bellatrix was to make her stop existing, i.e., kill her.
Harry congratulated his brain on thinking outside the box and told
it to continue searching.
Kill her and then bring her back, came the next suggestion. Use
Frigideiro to cool Bellatrix down to the point where her brain activity stops,
then warm her up afterward using Thermos, just like people who fall into
very cold water can be successfully revived half-an-hour later without noticeable brain damage.
Harry considered this. Bellatrix might not survive in her debilitated
state. And it might not stop Death from seeing her. And he’d have trouble carrying a cold unconscious Bellatrix very far. And Harry couldn’t
remember the research on which exact body temperature was supposed
to be nonfatal but temporarily-brain-halting.
It was another good outside-the-box idea, but Harry told his brain
to keep thinking of...
* 900 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VI:
CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION

*
*

*

...ways to hide from Death...
A frown moved over Harry’s face. He’d heard something about that,
somewhere.
One of the requisites for becoming a powerful wizard is an excellent
memory, Professor Quirrell had said. The key to a puzzle is often something you read twenty years ago in an old scroll, or a peculiar ring you saw
on the ﬁnger of a man you met only once...
Harry focused as hard as he could, but he couldn’t remember, it was
on the tip of his tongue but he couldn’t remember; so he told his subconscious to go on trying to recollect it, and refocused his attention on
the other half of the problem.
How can I protect myself from the Dementors without a Patronus
Charm?
The Headmaster had been repeatedly exposed to a Dementor from a
few steps away, over and over throughout a whole day, and had come out
of it looking merely tired. How had the Headmaster done that? Could
Harry do it too?
It could just be some random genetic thing, in which case Harry was
screwed. But assuming the problem was solvable...
Then the obvious answer was that Dumbledore wasn’t afraid of
death.
Dumbledore really wasn’t afraid of death. Dumbledore honestly,
truly believed that death was the next great adventure. Believed it in his
core, not just as convenient words used to suppress cognitive dissonance,
not just pretending to be wise. Dumbledore had decided that death was
the natural and normative order, and whatever tiny lingering fear was
still in him, it had taken a long time and repeated exposures for the Dementor to drain him through that small ﬂaw.
That avenue was closed to Harry.
And then Harry thought of the ﬂip side, the obvious inverse question:
Why am I so much more vulnerable than average? Other students didn’t
fall over when they faced the Dementor.
Harry meant to destroy Death, to end it if he could. He meant to live
forever, if he could; he had hope of it, the thought of Death brought him
*

901 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SIX

*
*

*

no sense of despair or inevitability. He was not blindly attached to his
own life, did not value himself above others; indeed it had taken an eﬀort
not to burn away all of his own life on the need to protect others from
Death. Why did the shadows of Death have such power over Harry? He
would not have thought himself so afraid.
Was it Harry, all along, who’d been rationalizing? Who was secretly
so afraid of death that it was twisting his own thoughts, as Harry had
accused Dumbledore?
Harry considered this, preventing himself from ﬂinching away. It
felt uncomfortable, but...
But...
But uncomfortable thoughts weren’t always true, and this one didn’t
sound exactly right. Like there was a grain of truth in it, but it wasn’t
hiding where the hypothesis said it was—
And that was when Harry realized.
Oh.
Oh, I understand now.
The one who is afraid, is...
Harry asked his dark side what it thought of death.
And Harry’s Patronus wavered, dimmed, almost went out upon the
instant, for that desperate, sobbing, screaming terror, an unutterable fear
that would do anything not to die, throw everything aside not to die, that
couldn’t think straight or feel straight in the presence of that absolute
horror, that couldn’t look into the abyss of nonexistence any more than
it could have stared straight into the Sun, a blind terriﬁed thing that only
wanted to ﬁnd a dark corner and hide and not have to think about it any
more—
The silver ﬁgure had darkened to moonlight, was ﬂickering like a
failing candle—
It’s all right, thought Harry, it’s all right.
Visualizing himself cradling his dark side like a frightened child in
his arms.
It’s right and proper to be horriﬁed, because death is horrible. You don’t
have to hide your horror, you don’t have to feel ashamed of it, you can wear
it as a badge of honor, openly in the Sun.
*

902 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VI:
CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION

*
*

*

It was strange, to feel himself split in two like this, the track of his
thoughts that gave the comfort, the track of his thoughts that followed
his dark side’s incomprehension at the alienness of the ordinary Harry’s
thoughts; of all the things that his dark side associated with its own fear
of death, the one thing it had never expected or imagined that it might
ﬁnd, was acceptance and praise and help...
You don’t have to ﬁght alone, Harry said silently to his dark side. The
rest of me will back you up on this. I won’t let myself die, and I won’t let my
friends die either. Not you/I, not Hermione, not Mum or Dad, not Neville
or Draco or anyone, this is the will to protect... Visualizing wings of sunlight, like the wings of the Patronus he had spread, to give shelter to that
frightened child.
The Patronus brightened again, the world spun around Harry or it
was his own mind that was spinning?
Take my hand, Harry thought and visualized, come with me, and we
will do this thing together...
There was a lurch in Harry’s mind, like his brain had taken one step
to the left, or the universe had taken one step to the right.
And in a brightly lit corridor in Azkaban, the dim gas lights far outshone by the steady and unwavering light of a human-shaped Patronus,
an invisible boy stood with a strange small smile on his face, shaking
only slightly.
Harry knew, somehow, that he’d just done something signiﬁcant,
something that went beyond just strengthening his resistance to Dementors.
And more than that, he’d remembered. Thinking of Death as an
anthropomorphic ﬁgure had done the trick, ironically enough. Now
Harry could remember it, what was reputed to hide someone from the
gaze of Death himself...

**
*
In a corridor of Azkaban, a wizard’s striding legs came to an abrupt
halt; for the bright silver thing that was his guide, had halted in midair,
* 903 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SIX

*
*

*

ﬂuttering its wings in distress. The brilliant white phoenix craned its
head, looking backward and forward as though confused; and then it
turned to its master and shook its head in apology.
Without another word, the old wizard turned and strode back the
way he came.

**
*
Harry stood straight and upright, feeling the fear wash over him and
around him. Some tiny part of him might have been eroded a little
by the waves of emptiness that broke continually upon his unmoving
stone, but his limbs were not cold, and his magic was with him. In time
those waves might corrode him and consume him, sneaking through
whatever tiny part of him still cowered before Death instead of using its
fear to energize itself for battle. But that doom would take time, with the
shadows of Death far away and uncaring of him. The ﬂaw, the crack, the
fault-line that was in him had been repaired, and the stars blazed brightly
in his mind, vast and unafraid, eternal and peaceful, and brilliant in the
midst of the cold and darkness.
To anyone else’s eyes, it would have seemed that the boy stood alone
in the dimly lit metal corridor, wearing that strange smile.
For Bellatrix Black and the snake draped around her shoulders were
concealed by the Cloak of Invisibility, one of the three Deathly Hallows
and reputed to hide its wearer from the gaze of Death himself. The riddle
whose answer had been lost, and which Harry had found anew.
And Harry knew, now, that the concealment of the Cloak was
more than the mere transparency of Disillusionment, that the Cloak
kept you hidden and not just invisible, as unseeable as were Thestrals
to the unknowing. And Harry also knew that it was Thestral blood
which painted the symbol of the Deathly Hallows on the inside of the
Cloak, binding into the Cloak that portion of Death’s power, enabling
the Cloak to confront the Dementors on their own level and block them.
It had felt like guessing, and yet a certain guess, the knowledge coming
to him in the instant of solving the riddle.
*

904 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VI:
CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION

*
*

*

Bellatrix was still transparent within the Cloak, but to Harry she
was no longer hidden, he knew that she was there, as obvious to him
as a Thestral. For Harry had only loaned his Cloak, not given it; and
he had comprehended and mastered the Deathly Hallow that had been
passed down through the Potter line.
Harry gazed directly at the invisible woman, and said, “Can the Dementors reach you, Bella?”
“No,” said the woman in a soft, wondering voice. Then, “But my
Lord... you...”
“If you say anything foolish, it will annoy me,” Harry said coldly.
“Or are you under the impression that I would sacriﬁce myself for you?”
“No, my Lord,” the Dark Lord’s servant replied, sounding puzzled,
and perhaps awed.
“Follow,” spoke Harry’s cold whisper, and they continued their journey downward, as the Dark Lord reached into his pouch, and retrieved
and ate a cookie. If Bellatrix had asked, Harry would have claimed it
was for the chocolate, but she didn’t ask.

**
*
The old wizard strode back into the midst of the Aurors, the silver and
the red-golden phoenixes now following behind.
“You—” Amelia began to bellow.
“They have dismissed their Patronus,” said Dumbledore. The old
wizard didn’t seem to raise his voice but his calm words somehow overrode her own. “I cannot ﬁnd them now.”
Amelia gritted her teeth, and put a number of scathing remarks on
hold, and turned to the communications oﬃcer. “Tell the duty room to
ask the Dementors again if they can sense Bellatrix Black.”
The communications specialist spoke to her mirror for a moment,
and a few seconds later, looked up, surprised. “No—”
Amelia was already cursing violently in her mind.
“—but they can see someone else on the lower levels who isn’t a prisoner.”
*

905 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SIX

*
*

*

“Fine!” snapped Amelia. “Tell the Dementor that a dozen of its kind
are authorized to enter Azkaban and seize whoever that is and anyone
in their company! And if they see Bellatrix Black, they’re to Kiss her
immediately!”
Amelia turned and glared toward Dumbledore, then, daring him to
argue; but the old wizard only looked at her a bit sadly, and held his
peace.

**
*
Auror McCusker ﬁnished speaking to the corpse that drifted outside the
window, conveying the Director’s orders.
The corpse gave him a deathly smile that almost unstrung his limbs,
and then ﬂoated downward.
Soon after, a dozen Dementors arose from where they had drifted in
the central pit of Azkaban, and headed outward, toward the walls of the
vast metal structure that towered above them.
Entering through holes set into the base of Azkaban, the darkest of
all creatures began their march of horror.

* 906 *

CHAPTER

FIFT Y-SE V EN

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART VII:
,
CONSTRAINED COGNITION
arry had hoped that he’d just achieved fusion with his mysterious
dark side and would be enabled to draw on all of its beneﬁts with
none of its drawbacks, call up the crystal clarity and indomitable will
on demand, without needing to go cold or angry.
Once again, he’d overestimated how much progress he’d made. Something had happened, but Harry still had a mysterious dark side, it was
still separate from him, and his ordinary self was still domitable. And
despite the repair work he’d done on his dark side’s fear of death, he
didn’t dare go dark while unshielded in Azkaban, that was tempting fate
way too much.
Which was unfortunate, because a bit of nondomitability would have
sure come in handy about now.
What made it harder was that he couldn’t slump against a wall,
couldn’t break into tears, couldn’t even heave a sigh. His dear Bella was
watching him and that wasn’t the sort of thing her Dark Lord would do.
“My Lord—” Bellatrix said. Her low voice was strained. “The Dementors—they are coming—I can feel them, my Lord—”
“Thank you, Bella,” said a dry voice, “I already know that.”
Harry couldn’t sense the holes in the world the same way as when
he’d been wearing the Deathly Hallow, but he could feel the empty pull
increasing in intensity. At ﬁrst he’d mistaken it for the result of descending a stairwell, until he and Bellatrix had ﬁnished descending and the pull

H

*

907 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

had gone on increasing. Then decreased, as the Dementors moved away
along the spiral, then increased as they went up another ﬂight of stairs...
There were Dementors within Azkaban itself now, and they were coming for him. Of course they were. Harry might be resistant now, but he
was not hidden.
New requirement, Harry told his brain. Find a way of defeating Dementors that doesn’t invoke my Patronus Charm. Alternatively, ﬁnd yet
another way of hiding someone from Dementors, besides the Cloak of Invisibility—
I quit, said his brain. Find yourself another piece of computing substrate
to solve your ridiculously overconstrained problems.
I mean it, thought Harry.
So do I, said his brain. Put up your Patronus Charm and wait for the
Aurors to ﬁnd you. Be sensible. It’s over.
Give up...
The sucking emptiness seemed to pull harder, as he thought it; and
Harry realized what was happening, concentrated more intensely on the
stars, turned his mind away from the despair—
You know, observed the logical side of him, if you’re not allowed to
think any negative thoughts because that will open your mind to the Dementors, that’s a cognitive bias too, how would you know if it actually was time
to give up?
A desperate sobbing scream rose up from below, words mixed in like
“no” and “away”. The prisoners knew, the prisoners could feel it.
The Dementors were coming.
“My Lord, you—you should not risk yourself for me—take back your
Cloak—”
“Be silent, fool,” hissed an angry voice. “When I decide to sacriﬁce
you I will tell you so.”
She’s got a valid point, said Slytherin. You shouldn’t risk yourself for
her, there’s no way her life is as valuable as yours.
For an instant Harry considered sacriﬁcing Bellatrix to save himself—
And in that moment, some of the dim orange gas-light seemed to
ﬂee the corridor, a touch of cold crept over Harry’s ﬁngertips. And he
knew, then, that to think of leaving Bellatrix to the shadows of Death,
* 908 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

would make him vulnerable once more. Even in the moment of making
the decision, he might become unable to cast the Patronus Charm, for
he would have given up the thought that had saved him before.
It occurred to Harry that he could still take the Cloak from Bellatrix
afterward, even if he couldn’t cast the Patronus Charm; and then he
had to wrench his thoughts away from that option, focus ﬁrmly on his
decision not to do it, or he might have just fallen over where he stood.
For the whirlpool of emptiness swirling around him was now deadly
strong; there were screams coming from above, and the screams below
had stopped.
This is ridiculous, said his logical side. Rational agents shouldn’t have
to put up with this sort of censored reasoning process, all the theorems assume that how you think doesn’t aﬀect reality apart from your actual actions,
which is why you’re free to choose an optimal algorithm without worrying
about how your thoughts interact with Dementors—
...
That is a really dumb idea, said Gryﬃndor. Even I think it’s a dumb
idea and I’m your Gryﬃndor side. You’re not seriously going to just stand
there and—

**
*
“We have a ﬁx!” shouted Ora, holding up her magic mirror as though in
triumph. “The Dementor outside the inner wall pointed to level seven,
C spiral, that’s where they are!”
Her Aurors were looking at her expectantly.
“No,” Amelia said in a level voice. “That’s where one of them is.
The Dementors still can’t ﬁnd Bellatrix Black. We are not running down
there and letting her through in the confusion, and we are not dividing
our forces to be ambushed. So long as we move with caution, we can’t
lose. Tell Scrimgeour and Shacklebolt to keep going down level by level,
same as before—”
The old wizard was already striding forward. Amelia didn’t even
bother cursing him, this time, as once again their carefully constructed
* 909 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

shields parted like water and rippled gently in his wake.

**
*
Harry waited at the beginning of the corridor, just next to the stairs
leading upward. Bellatrix and the snake were behind him, concealed by
the Deathly Hallow that Harry had mastered; he knew, though he could
not see, that the emaciated sorceress was sitting upon the stairs, slumped
back, since Harry had withdrawn his Hover Charm to free up his mind
and magic.
Harry’s eyes were ﬁxed on the far end of the corridor, next to the
stairs that led downward. Not in his mind now, but in true reality, the
light in the corridor had dimmed, the temperature had fallen. The fear
thundered over him and around him like a sea whipped by hurricane
winds, and the sucking emptiness had become a howling draw toward
some approaching black hole.
Up the stairs at the far end, ﬂoating smoothly through the dying air,
came the voids, the absences, the wounds in the world.
And Harry expected them to stop.
With all the will and focus he could muster, Harry expected them to
stop.
Anticipated their stopping.
Believed they would stop.
...that was the idea, anyway...
Harry shut down the dangerous stray thought, and expected the Dementors to halt. They had no intelligence of their own, they were just
wounds in the world, their form and structure was borrowed from others’ expectations. People had been able to negotiate with them, oﬀer
them victims in exchange for cooperation, only because they believed
Dementors would bargain. So if Harry believed hard enough that the
voids would turn and go, they would turn and go.
But the wounds in the world kept coming, the swirling fear seemed
like a solid thing now, the emptiness tearing at matter as well as mind,
*

910 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

substance as well as spirit, you could see the metal beginning to tarnish
as the holes in the world passed.
A small sound came from behind him, from Bellatrix, but she said
no word, for she had been instructed to remain silent.
Don’t think of them as creatures, think of them as psychosensitive objects,
they can be controlled if I can control myself—
The problem was that he couldn’t control himself so easily, couldn’t
make himself believe blue was green by an act of will. Couldn’t suppress
all those thoughts about how irrational it was to make yourself believe
something. How impossible it was to trick yourself into believing something if you knew that was what you were doing. All the training Harry
had given himself against self-deception was refusing to switch oﬀ no
matter how harmful it was in this unique special case—
The shadows of Death crossed the halfway point of the corridor, and
Harry held up his hand, ﬁngers spread, and said in a voice of ﬁrm and
conﬁdent command, “Stop.”
The shadows of Death stopped.
Behind Harry, Bellatrix gave a strangled gasp, like it was being torn
out of her.
Harry gestured to her, the signal he had set up in advance which
meant, repeat what you heard the Dementors say.
“They say,” Bellatrix said, her voice was shaking, “they said, ‘Bellatrix Black was promised us. Tell us where she hides, and you will be
spared.’”
“Bellatrix?” Harry said, making his voice sound amused. “She escaped a while ago.”
A moment later, Harry realized that he should have said that Bellatrix was among the Aurors in the top level, that would have caused more
confusion—
No, it was wrong to think of the Dementors as trickable, they were
merely things, they were controlled only by expectations—
“They say,” Bellatrix said in a cracked voice, “they say they know
you’re lying.”
The voids began to move forward again.
Her anticipations are more solidly believed than mine; she is controlling
*

911

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

them, unwittingly—
“Don’t resist,” Harry said, pointing his wand behind him.
“I, I love you, farewell, my Lord—”
“Somnium.”
It had helped, strangely enough, hearing those particular awful
words, understanding Bellatrix’s mistake; it reminded Harry why he was
ﬁghting.
“Stop,” Harry said again. Bellatrix was asleep; now only his own
will, his own expectations rather, should control those spheres of annihilation—
But they kept on gliding forward, and Harry couldn’t stop himself
from worrying that the previous experience had damaged his conﬁdence,
which meant that he wouldn’t be able to stop them, and as he noticed
himself thinking that, he doubted even more—he needed more time to
prepare, really ought to practice controlling just one Dementor in a cage
ﬁrst—
There was only a quarter of corridor now between Harry and the
shadows of death, the empty winds were so strong that Harry could feel
the erosion beginning in the cracks of himself.
And the thought came to Harry that maybe he was wrong, maybe
Dementors did have their own desires and planning capability. Or
maybe they were controlled by how everyone thought they worked, not
just whoever was closest to them. And in either case—
Harry drew up his wand into the starting position for the Patronus
Charm, and spoke.
“One of your number went to Hogwarts and did not return. It no
longer exists; that Death is dead.”
The Dementors halted, a dozen wounds in the world stood motionless, while the emptiness screamed around them like a deadly wind to
nowhere.
“Turn and go and do not speak of this to anyone, little shadows, or I
will destroy you as well.”
Harry’s ﬁngers slid into the starting position for the Patronus
Charm, and readied himself to cast it; in his mind, the Earth shone
among the stars, the day side bright and blue with reﬂected sunlight, the
*

912

*

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

night side glimmering with the light of human cities. Harry wasn’t bluﬀing, wasn’t trying to do anything tricky with his thoughts. The shadows
of Death would move forward and be annihilated, or they would depart,
he was equally ready for either...
And the voids retreated back as smoothly as they came, the winds of
nothingness lessening with each meter they traversed, as they slid back
down the stairs, and departed.
Whether they truly had their own pseudo-intelligence, or whether
Harry had ﬁnally succeeded in expecting them to go... that, Harry didn’t
know.
But they were gone.
Harry took a moment to sit down beside the unconscious Bellatrix
on the stairs, and slumped down as she was slumped, closing his eyes for
a moment, only a moment, he sure as hell wasn’t planning to sleep in
Azkaban, but he needed to take that moment. The Aurors would still
be going down the stairs slowly, Harry hoped, so it wouldn’t hurt to
take just ﬁve minutes to rest. Harry was careful to keep his thoughts
positive, cheerful, my, I’ll just have some nice regenerative rest here, and
then I’ll feel better, rather than, say, my, I’ll just collapse in emotional and
physical exhaustion, because the Dementors hadn’t yet retreated very far.
And by the way, Harry said to his brain, you’re ﬁred.

**
*
“I found him!” cried the old wizard’s voice.
Who? thought Amelia, as she turned to see Dumbledore’s return,
carrying in his arms—
—the one sight, the one person, she would never have expected to
behold—
—a man in torn red robes, looking scorched like he’d fought a small
war, blood dried on many cuts. His eyes were open, and he was chewing
on a bar of chocolate, held in his one living hand.
Bahry One-Hand was alive.
*

913

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

A glad cry went up, her Aurors lowering their wands, some of them
already starting to rush forward.
“Stay on guard!” bellowed Amelia. “Check them both for Polyjuice—
scan Bahry for small Animagi or traps—”

**
*
“Innervate. Wingardium Leviosa.”
There was a pause. Harry sensed, though he could not quite see,
that the invisible woman was pushing herself to her feet, and turning
her head to look around. “I’m... alive...?”
Harry was sorely tempted to say no, just to see what she made of
that. Instead he hissed, “Don’t ask stupid questions.”
“What happened?” whispered Bellatrix.
And the Dark Lord gave a wild, high-pitched laugh, and said, “I
scared the Dementors away, my dear Bella.”
There was a pause. Harry wished he could see Bellatrix’s face; had
he said the wrong thing?
After a time, in a quavering voice, “Could it be, my Lord, that in
your new form, you have begun to care for me—”
“No,” Harry said coldly, and turned from her (though he kept his
wand on her), and began walking. “And take care that you do not oﬀend
me again, or I will abandon you here, use or no use. Now follow, or be
left behind; I have work to do.”
Harry strode forward, not listening to the gasping sounds that came
from behind him; he knew Bellatrix was following.
...because the last thing that woman needed, the very last thing she
needed to start thinking before the psychiatric healer began trying to
deprogram her, was to believe that her Dark Lord could ever love her
back.

**
*
*

914

*

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

The old wizard smoothed his silver beard contemplatively, looking at
where Auror Bahry was being carried out of the room by two strong
Aurors.
“Do you understand this, Amelia?”
“No,” she said simply. She suspected some trap they hadn’t yet been
able to fathom, which was why Auror Bahry was going to be kept outside the main party and guarded.
“Perhaps,” the old wizard said at length, “whichever of their number
can cast the Patronus Charm, is more than a simple hostage. Someone
who was tricked into this, mayhap? For whatever reason, they left your
Auror alive; let us not be the ﬁrst to wield deadly curses, when we ﬁnd
them—”
“I see,” said the old witch in sudden realization, “that was their plan.
It costs them nothing to Oblivate him and leave him alive, and makes us
hesitate—” Amelia nodded decisively, and said to her people, “We carry
on as before.”
The old wizard sighed. “Any news from the Dementors?”
“If I tell you,” Amelia snapped, “will you run oﬀ again?”
“It costs you nothing, Amelia,” the old wizard said quietly, “and may
save one of your own people the ﬁght.”
Costs me nothing except my chance at vengeance—
But that was nothing compared to the other, the annoying old wizard
was often right in the end, it was part of what made him so annoying.
“The Dementors have ceased to answer questions about the other
person they said they saw,” Amelia told him, “and they will not say
why, nor where.”
Dumbledore turned to the blazing silver phoenix on his shoulder,
whose light illuminated the whole corridor, and received a silent headshake in reply. “I cannot detect them either,” said Dumbledore. Then
he shrugged. “I suppose I shall just walk the whole spiral from top to
bottom and see if anything turns up, shall I?”
Amelia would have ordered him not to do it, if she thought that
would have made the tiniest diﬀerence.
“Albus,” said Amelia as the old wizard turned to depart, “even you
can be ambushed.”
*

915

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

“Nonsense, my dear,” the old wizard said cheerfully as he strode
oﬀ yet again, waving as though in admonition his ﬁfteen-inch wand of
unidentiﬁable dark-grey wood, “I’m invincible.”
There was a pause.
(“He didn’t just really say that—” whispered the newest Auror
present, a still-prim young lady by the name of Noelle Curry, to the
senior member of her trio, Auror Brooks. “Did he?”)
(“He can get away with it,” Isabel whispered back to her, “he’s Dumbledore, not even Fate takes him seriously anymore.”)
“And that,” Amelia said heavily, for the beneﬁt of the younger Aurors, “is why we never call him in on anything unless we absolutely
must.”

**
*
Harry lay very still on the hard bench that served as the bed of this cell,
a blanket pulled over him, staying as absolutely motionless as he could
while he waited for the fear to return. There was a Patronus approaching,
and a powerful one. Bellatrix was hidden by a Deathly Hallow, no easy
Charm would penetrate that; but Harry did not know what other arts
the Aurors might employ to detect his own self, and dared not reveal his
ignorance by asking her. So Harry lay on a hard bed, in a cell with a
locked door, and the mighty metal door locked behind him, in absolute
darkness, with a thin blanket pulled over him, hoping that whoever it
was wouldn’t look in, or wouldn’t look too closely if they did—
That wasn’t a point Harry could aﬀect, really, that part of his fate
lay entirely in the hands of the Hidden Variables. Most of his mind was
concentrating on the ongoing Transﬁguration he was performing.
Listening in the silence, Harry heard the quick footsteps approach;
they paused outside his door, and then—
—continued onward.
Soon the fear returned.
Harry didn’t allow himself to notice his own relief, any more than he
allowed himself to notice the fear. He was holding in his mind the form
of a Muggle device rather larger than a car battery, and slowly applying
*

916

*

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

that Form to the substance of an ice cube (which Harry had frozen using
Frigideiro on water from a bottle in his pouch). You weren’t supposed
to Transﬁgure things to be burned, but between the original substance
being water, and the Bubble-Head Charm to protect their air supply,
Harry hoped that this wouldn’t make him or anyone else sick.
Now it was just a question of whether there would be enough time
before the Aurors did a detailed check on this cell block, for Harry to
ﬁnish this Transﬁguration, and the partial Transﬁguration he would do
after that—

**
*
When the old wizard strode back empty-handed, even Amelia began to
feel a twinge of worry. She and the other two Auror teams had worked a
third of the way down the three spirals, in synchrony so as not to allow
any gap in their coverage that could be jumped by cutting through a
ceiling, and they’d yet to ﬁnd any sign.
“Might I ask you to report?” Amelia said, keeping the edge out of
her voice.
“First a simple walk from top to bottom,” said the old wizard. He
was frowning, wrinkling his face even more than usual. “I examined
Bellatrix’s cell, and found a death doll left in her place. This escape was
meant to go unremarked, I think. There is something hidden in the
corner beneath a scrap of cloth; I left that undisturbed for your Aurors
to examine. On the return trip, I opened each door and looked within
the cells. I saw nothing Disillusioned, only the prisoners—”
They were interrupted by a scream from the red-golden phoenix, and
all her Aurors ﬂinched from it. Condemnation was in it, and an urgent
demand that almost started Amelia running from the corridor on the
spot.
“—in rather distressing condition,” Dumbledore said quietly. For a
moment the blue eyes were very cold beneath the half-moon glasses.
“Will any of you speak to me of the consequences of their actions?”
“I did not—” Amelia began.
*

917

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

“I know,” said the old wizard. “My apologies, Amelia.” He sighed.
“Some of the more recent prisoners had scraps of their magic left, when
I looked upon them, but I sensed no uneaten power; the strongest had
only as much magic left as a ﬁrst-year child. I heard Fawkes scream in
distress many times, but never challenge. It seems you shall have to continue your search; they can hide well enough to escape my mere glance.”

**
*
When Harry ﬁnished his ﬁrst Transﬁguration, he sat up, pulled back
the blanket that had covered him, cast a quick Lumos, glanced at his
watch, and was shocked to see that nearly an hour and thirty minutes
had passed. How much of that time had gone by since someone had
opened the door and then closed it again—Harry hadn’t been looking in
that direction, of course—that, Harry couldn’t guess.
“My Lord...?” whispered Bellatrix’s voice, soft and very tentative.
“You may speak now,” Harry said. He’d told her to remain silent
while he worked.
“That was Dumbledore who looked upon us.”
Pause.
“Interesting,” Harry said neutrally. He was glad he had not noticed
this at the time. That sounded like a rather close shave.
Harry said a word to his pouch, and began drawing forth the magical device that he would mate to the product of his hour’s labor. Then,
when that was drawn forth, another word brought forth a tube of
industrial-strength glue; before using it, Harry cast the Bubble-Head
Charm on himself and Bellatrix, and had Bellatrix cast the same Charm
on the snake, so that the glue fumes in the enclosed cell would not harm
them.
When the glue had begun to set, binding technology to magic, Harry
laid it down upon the bed, and sat down on the ﬂoor, resting his magic
and will for a moment before essaying the next Transﬁguration.
“My Lord...” Bellatrix said hesitantly.
“Yes?” said the dry voice.
*

918 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

“What is that device you made?”
Harry thought rapidly. It seemed like a good chance to check his
plans with her, under the guise of leading questions.
“Consider, my dear Bella,” said Harry smoothly. “How diﬃcult is it
for a powerful wizard to cut the walls of Azkaban?”
There was a pause, and then Bellatrix’s voice came, slow and puzzled,
“Not diﬃcult at all, my Lord...?”
“Indeed,” said the dry, high voice of Bella’s master. “Suppose one
were to do this, and ﬂy through the hole on a broomstick, and soar up
and away. Rescuing a prisoner from Azkaban would seem easy then,
would it not?”
“But my Lord...” said Bella. “The Aurors would—they have their
own broomsticks, my Lord, fast ones—”
Harry listened, it was as he had thought. The Dark Lord replied,
again in tones of smoothly Socratic inquiry, and Bellatrix asked a further
question, which Harry had not expected, but Harry’s own counterquestion showed that it should not matter in the end. And in response to
Bellatrix’s last question, the Dark Lord only smiled, and said that it was
time for him to resume his work.
And then Harry got up from the ﬂoor of the cell, went to the far
end of the cells, and touched his wand to the hard surface of the wall—
the wall of Azkaban, the solid metal that separated them from direct
exposure to the Dementors’ pit.
And Harry began a partial Transﬁguration.
This spell would go faster, Harry hoped. He’d spent hours and hours
practicing the unique magic, which had made it routine, not much more
diﬃcult for him than ordinary Transﬁguration. The shape he was changing had not all that much total volume, the Transﬁgured shape might be
tall and wide and long, but it was very thin. Half a millimeter, Harry
had thought, would be enough, considering the perfect smoothness...
On the long bench that served as a prison bed, where Harry had set
down the Transﬁgured technological device and the mated magic item
for the glue to dry, tiny letters in golden script gleamed on the Muggle artifact. Harry hadn’t really planned for them to be there, but they’d kept
running through the back of his mind, and so seemed to have become
*

919 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

part of the Transﬁgured form.
Ther were many diﬀerent things Harry could have said before using this particular triumph of technological ingenuity. Any number of
things that would be, in one sense or another, appropriate. Or at least
things that Harry could have said, would have said, if Bellatrix had not
been there.
But there was only one thing to say, that Harry would only get the
chance to say just this once, and probably never get a better chance to
say ever again. (Or think, anyway, if he couldn’t say it.) He hadn’t seen
the actual movie, but he’d seen a preview, and for some reason the phrase
had stuck in his mind.
The tiny golden letters upon the Muggle device said,
All right, you primitive screwheads! Listen up!

*

920 *

CHAPTER

FIFT Y-EIGHT

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART VIII:
,
CONSTRAINED COGNITION
n darkness absolute, a boy stood holding his wand to the solid metal
wall of Azkaban, essaying a magic that only three other people in the
world would have believed possible, and that none save he alone could
wield.
Of course a powerful wizard could’ve cut through the wall in seconds, with a gesture and a word.
For an average adult it might have been a matter of a few minutes’
work, and afterward they would have been winded.
But to accomplish the same end as a ﬁrst-year Hogwarts student, you
had to be eﬃcient.
Luckily—well, not luckily, luck had nothing to do with
it—conscientiously, Harry had practiced Transﬁguration for an extra hour every day, to the point where he was ahead of even Hermione
in that one class; he’d practiced partial Transﬁguration to the point
where his thoughts had begun taking the true universe for granted, so
that it required only slightly more eﬀort to keep its timeless quantum
nature in mind, even as he kept a ﬁrm mental separation between the
concept of Form and the concept of substance.
And the problem with that art having become so routine...
...was that Harry could think about other things while he was doing
it.

I

*

921 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Somehow his thoughts had managed to not go there, to not confront
the obvious, until he was faced with the prospect of really actually doing
it in just a few minutes.
What Harry was about to do...
...was dangerous.
Really dangerous.
Someone-might-actually-genuinely-get-killed dangerous.
Facing down twelve Dementors without a Patronus Charm had been
scary, but merely scary. Harry could have cast the Patronus Charm,
would have cast it as soon as he thought he was in danger of not being
able to do so, as soon as he felt his resistance beginning to fail. And
even if that hadn’t worked... even so, unless the Dementors had been
instructed to Kiss anyone they found, failure shouldn’t have been fatal.
This was diﬀerent.
The Transﬁgured Muggle device could explode and kill them.
The interface between the technology and the magic could fail in any
number of ways and kill them.
The Aurors could get in a lucky shot.
It was just, well...
Seriously dangerous.
Harry had caught his mind trying to argue itself into believing that
it was safe.
And sure, the whole thing could work, but...
But even leaving out that rationalists weren’t ever allowed to argue
themselves into things, Harry knew he couldn’t possibly have argued
himself into estimating less than a 20% probability of dying.
Lose, said Huﬄepuﬀ.
Lose, said the voice of Professor Quirrell in his mind.
Lose, said his mental model of Hermione and Professor McGonagall
and Professor Flitwick and Neville Longbottom and, well, basically everyone Harry knew except for Fred and George, who would have gone
for it in a hot second.
He should just go ﬁnd Dumbledore and turn himself in. He should,
he really really should, it was the only sane thing to do at this point.
And if it’d been only Harry on the mission, only his own life that’d
*

922 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VIII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

been at stake, he would have; he surely would have.
The part that was almost causing him to lose his concentration on the
partial Transﬁguration he was performing, the part that was threatening
to open him to the Dementors...
...was Professor Quirrell, still unconscious, still a snake.
If Professor Quirrell went to Azkaban for his part in the escape, he
would die. He probably wouldn’t last even a week. He was that sensitive.
It was that simple.
If Harry lost here...
He lost Professor Quirrell.
Even though he’s probably evil, said the Huﬄepuﬀ part of him quietly.
Even so?
It wasn’t a decision that Harry had made in any conscious way. He
just couldn’t do it. Losing was for House points, not people.
If you think your own life is valuable enough that you’re not willing
to take on an eighty percent probability of dying in order to protect all the
prisoners in Azkaban, his Slytherin side observed, there’s no way you can
justify taking a twenty percent risk to your life to save Bellatrix and Professor
Quirrell. The math doesn’t add up, you can’t be assigning consistent utilities
over outcomes here.
The logical side of him noted that Slytherin had just won the argument.
Harry kept the Form in his mind, kept on casting the spell. He could
always just abort the mission when he was done with the Transﬁguration,
he didn’t want to lose the eﬀort he’d already invested.
And then Harry thought of something else that suddenly made it
very hard to keep the magic going, very hard to keep up his resistance
to the Dementors.
What if the portkey doesn’t take us where Professor Quirrell said it did?
It was obvious in retrospect the moment he thought about it.
Even if the planned escape went completely right, even if the Muggle device worked and didn’t explode and didn’t interact badly with the
mated magic item, even if the Aurors didn’t get in a lucky shot, even if
Harry made it far enough away from Azkaban to use the portkey...
...there might not be a psychiatric healer at the end of it.
*

923 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

That was something Harry had believed when he’d trusted Professor
Quirrell, and he’d forgotten to re-evaluate it after Professor Quirrell was
no longer to be trusted.
You can’t do this, said Huﬄepuﬀ. At this point we’re talking mere
stupidity.
Cold seemed to spread through the room, but Harry kept the Transﬁguration going, even as his resistance against the Dementors faltered.
I can’t lose Professor Quirrell.
He tried to kill a police oﬃcer, said Huﬄepuﬀ. You already lost him,
in that moment. Bellatrix is probably just what everyone thinks she is. Just
take your Cloak back, go ﬁnd Dumbledore and tell him you were tricked.
No, thought Harry desperately, not without talking to Professor
Quirrell, there might be an explanation, I don’t know, maybe he was
standing far enough away from my Patronus that the Dementors got to
him... I don’t understand, it doesn’t make sense on any hypothesis, why he
would do that... I can’t just...
Harry turned his mind away from that chain of thought before it
completely broke his resistance to the fear, because he couldn’t think of
feeding Professor Quirrell to Dementors while staying resolved against
Death, it was a cognitive impossibility.
Your reasoning is artiﬁcially impaired, observed the logical part of him
calmly, ﬁnd a way to unimpair it.
All right, let’s just generate alternatives, Harry thought. Not choose,
not weigh, certainly not commit... just think about what else I might be able
to do besides the original plan.
And Harry went on cutting the hole in the wall. He was using partial Transﬁguration on a thin cylindrical shell of metal, two meters in
diameter and half a millimeter thick, running all the way through the
wall. He was Transﬁguring that half-millimeter thickness of metal into
motor oil. Motor oil was a liquid and you weren’t to Transﬁgure liquids because they might evaporate, but he and Bellatrix and the snake
all had Bubble-Head Charms. And Harry would cast Finite on the oil
immediately after, dispelling his own Transﬁguration...
...as soon as the separated and lubricated hunk of metal slid out of
*

924 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VIII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

the wall and onto the ﬂoor of their cell, he’d slanted it so gravity would
pull it in, once the Transﬁguration was done.
If Harry and Bellatrix didn’t exit on his broomstick through the resulting hole in the wall...
Harry’s brain suggested that he could try to Transﬁgure a surface
cover over the hole in the wall, leaving a space for Bellatrix and Professor
Quirrell to hide in, wearing the Cloak, while Harry turned himself in.
And Professor Quirrell would eventually wake up, and he and Bellatrix
could try to ﬁgure out how to exit Azkaban on their own.
It was, ﬁrst of all, a dumb idea, and second, there would still be a
huge hunk of metal on the ﬂoor of the cell, which would give it away.
And then Harry’s brain saw the obvious.
Let Bellatrix and Professor Quirrell use the escape route you invented.
You stay behind, and turn yourself in.
Bellatrix and Professor Quirrell were the ones whose lives were at
stake.
They were gaining, not losing, from taking the risk.
And there was no reason, no sane reason at all, for Harry to go with
them.
A calm came over Harry as he thought it, the cold and darkness that
had been wavering around the fringes of his mind retreated. Yes, that was
it, that was the creative outside-the-box route, that was the hidden third
alternative. The falseness of the dilemma was obvious in retrospect. If
Harry turned himself in, he didn’t have to turn in Bellatrix and Professor
Quirrell. If Bellatrix and Professor Quirrell took a dangerous escape
route, Harry didn’t need to go with them.
Harry didn’t even need to face the embarrassment of admitting he’d
been tricked, if he ordered Bellatrix to remove the memory. Everyone
would just assume he’d been kidnapped, including Harry himself. Admittedly, there was no plausible reason why the Dark Lord would ever
ask Bellatrix to do that; but Harry could simply smile and tell Bellatrix
she wasn’t allowed to know, and that would be that...

**
*
*

925 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Her Auror team had gotten around three-quarters of the way down Azkaban, as had the other two teams on the other two spirals. Amelia was
feeling tenser already, though she was betting on the criminals hiding on
the second-to-lowest ﬂoor, part of her wished Dumbledore had thought
to check that speciﬁc ﬂoor more carefully and part of her was glad he
hadn’t.
And then there was a distant sound, like a tiny ‘tink’ noise coming
from far away. Like a very loud sound coming from the second-to-lowest
ﬂoor, say.
Amelia looked at Dumbledore before she realized, before she managed to stop herself.
The old wizard shrugged, gave her a small smile, said, “Since you
asked it, Amelia,” and went oﬀ yet again.

**
*
“Finite Incantatem,” Harry said to the oil coating the giant chunk of
metal on the ﬂoor. He hardly heard himself speak, his ears were still
ringing from the gigantic thud of the solid metal sliding out of the wall
and falling. (He should have put up a Quieting Charm, in retrospect,
though that wouldn’t have stopped the noise from spreading through
the solid metal ﬂoor.) And then Harry said it again, “Finite Incantatem”
to the oil coating the two-meter hole in the wall, spreading the eﬀect
wide; it was his own magic Harry was canceling, which made the spell
almost eﬀortless. Harry was feeling a bit tired now, but that was the
last use of magic he would need. He hadn’t even needed to do it, really,
but Harry didn’t want to leave Transﬁgured liquid lying around, and he
didn’t want to betray the secret of partial Transﬁguration either.
It seemed very... inviting, that two-meter hole leading to freedom.
The light from outside coming in... wasn’t exactly the Sun shining
on his face, but it was brighter than anything of Azkaban’s interior.
Harry was tempted to just go with, just hop on the broomstick with
Bellatrix and the snake. Chances were that they would get out safely.
*

926 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VIII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

And if they did get out safely, and Harry came with, then he and Professor Quirrell could go back in time and look perfectly innocent, everything could go back to normal.
If Harry stayed behind and turned himself in... then even if everyone
assumed Harry had been a hostage, assumed Harry had lied to Professor
McGonagall’s Patronus at wandpoint... even if Harry himself got oﬀ
lightly, well...
It wasn’t likely that the Defense Professor would go on teaching at
Hogwarts.
Professor Quirrell would have reached the predestined end of his career, in February of the school year.
And yes, Professor McGonagall would kill Harry, and yes, it would
be slow and painful.
But staying behind was the sensible, safe, sane thing to do, and Harry
was feeling more relaxed than regretful.
Harry turned to Bellatrix; he opened his mouth to instruct her a ﬁnal
time—
And there was a hiss, a weak hiss, a hiss that sounded slow and confused, and the hiss said,
“What wass... that noisse?”

**
*
Through the corridor the old wizard strode. He came to a metal door
and opened it, already knowing from memory that the cells within were
empty.
Seven mighty and discerning incantations the wizard spoke then, before he moved on; it would be little enough exertion in total, with so
few cells left to check.

**
*
“Teacher,” Harry hissed. So many emotions bubbling up in him, all at
once. He knew, though he could not see, that the green snake around
*

927 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Bellatrix’s shoulders, was slowly lifting its head to look around. “Are
you... all right, teacher?”
“Teacher?” came the weak, confused hiss. “Where iss thiss?
“Prisson,” Harry hissed, “the prisson with life-eaterss, we were to resscue a woman, you and I. You tried to sslay the protector man, I blocked your
killing cursse, there was a ressonance between uss... you fell unconssciouss,
I had to defeat the protector man mysself... my guardian Charm wass disspelled, the life-eaterss could tell the protectorss that the woman had esscaped.
There iss ssomeone here who can ssensse my guardian Charm, probably the
sschoolmasster... so had to disspell my guardian Charm, ﬁnd diﬀerent way to
hide you and the woman from life-eaterss without guardian Charm, learn
to protect mysself without guardian Charm, sscare oﬀ life-eaterss without
guardian Charm, then devisse new esscape plan for you and the woman,
and ﬁnally, cut hole in thick metal wall of prisson even though I am only
ﬁrsst-year sstudent. No time to explain, you musst go now. If we never meet
again, teacher, then I was glad to know you for a time, even though you are
probably evil. It iss good to have the chance to ssay thiss much: Goodbye.”
And Harry took the broomstick and presented it to Bellatrix, saying
simply, “Get on.”
He had decided to keep the memories. For one thing, they were
important. For another, he and the Defense Professor had started planning this a week ago, and Harry wasn’t about to obliterate the whole
last week, or explain to Bellatrix exactly what needed to be Obliviated.
Harry could probably fool Veritaserum, and if Dumbledore insisted that
Harry drop his Occlumency shields for a deeper examination... well,
Harry had acted heroically throughout.
“Sstop!” said the snake. Its voice was stronger now. “Sstop, sstop, sstop!
What do you mean, goodbye?”
“Esscape plan iss rissky,” said Harry. “My life iss not at sstake, only yourss
and herss. Sso I am sstaying, turning mysself in—”
“No!” said the snake. The hiss was forceful. “Musst not! Not permitted!”
Bellatrix mounted the broomstick; Harry could sense (but never see)
her head turning to look at him, she said no word. Awaiting him, perhaps, or merely awaiting his orders.
*

928 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VIII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

“No longer trusst you,” Harry said simply. “Not ssince you tried to sslay
the protector man.”
And the snake hissed, “I did not sseek to sslay the protector man! Are
you fool, boy? Sslaying him would not make ssensse, evil or no!”
The Earth ceased to turn on its axis, paused in its orbit around the
Sun.
The snake’s hiss was now more furious than anything Harry had ever
heard from the human Professor Quirrell. “Sslay him? Had I ssought to
sslay him he would have been dead within ssecondss, fool boy, he wass no
match for me! I ssought to ssubdue, to dominate, force him to drop sshieldss
upon hiss mind, needed to read him, to know who awaited hiss reply, learn
detailss for memory sspell—”
“You casst killing cursse!”
“Knew he would dodge!”
“Wass hiss life worth sso little? What if he did not dodge?”
“Would have pusshed him out of the way with own magic, fool boy!”
Again the pause in the planet’s spin. Harry hadn’t thought of that.
“Witlesss dunce of a plotter,” hissed the snake, so angrily that the hisses
seemed to overlap and slither over each other’s tails, “clever imbecile,
cunning idiot, fool of an untrained Sslytherin, your missplaced misstrust hass
ruined—”
“Thiss iss not a fair time to argue,” Harry observed mildly. The surge
of relief trying to ﬂood through him was canceled by the increased tension. “Ssince I cannot get angry at you properly, without opening mysself to
life-eaterss. Musst russh, ssomeone may have heard noisse—”
“Explain esscape plan,” the snake said imperiously. “Sswiftly!”
Harry explained. Parseltongue didn’t have words for the Muggle
technology, but Harry described the function and Professor Quirrell
seemed to understand.
There were a few short hisses, the snakish equivalent of a bark of surprised laughter, and then, snapped commands. “Tell woman to look away,
casst sspell of ssilence, sset guardian Charm outside door. Will transsform
mysself, make few sswift improvementss to your invention, give woman
emergency potion sso sshe can sshield uss, transsform back before you disspell
Charm. Plan will be ssafer, then.”
*

929 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

“And am I to believe,” Harry hissed, “that healer for woman truly
awaitss uss?”
“Usse ssensse, boy! Ssupposse I am evil. To end usse of you here iss obvioussly not what I planned. Misssion iss target of opportunity, invented after
ssaw your guardian Charm, whole aﬀair meant to be unnoticed, hid when
left eating-place. Obvioussly you will ssee persson pretending to be healer on
arrival! Go back to eating-place afterward, original plan carriess on undissturbed!”
Harry stared at the invisible snake.
On the one hand, saying it like that made Harry feel rather dumb.
And on the other hand, it wasn’t exactly reassuring.
“Sso,” Harry hissed, “what iss your plan for me, precissely?”
“You ssaid no time,” came the snake’s hiss, “but plan iss for you to rule
country, obvioussly, even your young noble friend hass undersstood that by
now, assk him on return if you wissh. Will ssay no more now, iss time to ﬂy,
not sspeak.”

**
*
The old wizard reached out toward another metal door, from behind
which came a endless dead mutter, “I’m not serious, I’m not serious,
I’m not serious...” The red-golden phoenix on his shoulder was already
screaming urgently, and the old wizard was already wincing, when—
Another cry pierced the corridor, phoenix-like but not the true
phoenix’s call.
The wizard’s head turned, looked at the blazing silver creature on
his other shoulder, even as ephemeral and substanceless talons launched
the spell-entity into the air.
The false phoenix ﬂew down the corridor.
The old wizard raced oﬀ after, legs churning like a spry young man
of sixty.
The true phoenix screamed once, twice, and a third time, hovering
before the metal door; and then, when it became clear that its master
would not return for all its calling, ﬂew reluctantly after.

*

930 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VIII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

**
*

Professor Quirrell had assumed his true form, this time—Polyjuice only
lasted for an hour without redosing—and though the Defense Professor
was pale, leaning against the metal bars of the nearest cell, his magic
was strong enough to seize his wand without a word, even as Bellatrix
doﬀed the Cloak and placed it obediently in Harry’s waiting hand. The
sense of doom was building once more, though not in full force, as the
Defense Professor’s power returned, the fringes of its vast force clashing
with Harry’s slight childish aura.
Harry said aloud the description of his Muggle device, naming it to
the observing wizard, and then a Finite from Harry turned all his hard
work back into an ice cube. Professor Quirrell could not cast spells on
something Harry had Transﬁgured, for that would be an interaction,
however slight, between their magics, but—
Three seconds after, Professor Quirrell was holding his own Transﬁgured version of the Muggle device. A single barked word and a sweep
of his wand, and the residue of glue was gone from the magical item;
three more incantations later, the magical and technological were fused
together as though into a single thing, and Charms of Unbreakability
and ﬂawless function had been cast upon the Muggle device.
(Harry felt a lot better about doing this under adult supervision.)
A potion was thrown to Bellatrix, and Professor Quirrell and Harry
both commanded, “Drink,” as though speaking in the same voice. The
emaciated woman had already been lifting it to her lips, without waiting;
for it was evident to anyone that this snake Animagus was a servant of
the Dark Lord, and a powerful and trusted one.
Harry ﬁnished pulling the hood of the Cloak of Invisibility over his
head.
A brief and terrible magic lashed out from the Defense Professor’s
wand, scouring the hole in the wall, scarring the huge chunk of metal
that lay in the room’s midst; as Harry had requested, saying that the
method he’d used might identify him.
*

931

*

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

“Left-hand glove,” Harry said to his pouch, and drew it forth, and
put it on.
A gesture from the Defense Professor made a harness appear upon
Bellatrix’s shoulders, and another, smaller cloth device upon her hand,
and something like handcuﬀs on her wrists, even as the woman ﬁnished
drinking the potion.
A strange, unhealthy color seemed to come over Bellatrix’s pale face,
she straightened, her sunken eyes seemed brighter and far more dangerous...
...small wisps of steam were coming out of her ears...
(Harry decided not to think about that part.)
...and Bellatrix Black laughed, then, sudden mad laughter that rang
much too loudly amid the small prison cells of Azkaban.
(Very soon, the Defense Professor had said, Bellatrix would fall unconscious and stay that way for quite awhile, the price of the potion
she had taken; but for just a few moments she would regain perhaps a
twentieth part of the power she had once wielded.)
The Defense Professor threw his wand toward Bellatrix, and an instant later blurred into a green snake.
An instant after that the Dementors’ fear returned to the room.
Bellatrix ﬂinched only slightly, caught the wand, and gestured without a word; the snake ﬂew up and was inserted into the harness on her
back.
Harry said “Up!” to the broomstick.
Bellatrix attached the wand to the holster on her hand.
Harry leaped onto the two-person broomstick in the lead position.
Bellatrix followed behind him, she took the cuﬄike devices on her
wrists and chained her hands to the grips of the broomstick, even as
Harry’s right hand shoved his wand into his pouch.
And the three shot forward through the hole in the wall—
—emerging into the open air, directly above the Dementors’ pit, in
the interior of the vast triangular prism that was Azkaban, the blue sky
now clearly visible above them, shining down its daylight.
Harry angled the broomstick and began accelerating, upward and
toward the center of the triangular space. His left hand, gloved to prevent
*

932 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT VIII:
CONSTRAINED COGNITION

*
*

*

direct contact between his skin and something which Professor Quirrell
had Transﬁgured, held the switch of the control on the Muggle device.
Far above them, distant shouts rang out.
All right, you primitive screwheads!
Aurors on fast racing broomsticks angled out of the sky, diving
straight down toward them, faint sparks of light already blazing downward as the ﬁrst shots were ﬁred.
Listen up!
“Protego Maximus!” shouted Bellatrix in a mighty, cracked voice, followed by a cackling laugh as a shimmering blue ﬁeld surrounded them.
You see this?
From the decaying pit in the center of Azkaban, over a hundred Dementors rose into the air, appearing to some as a great mass of corpses,
a ﬂying graveyard; appearing to another as a conglomerate of absences
that seemed to form one vast rip in the world as they slid upward.
This...
The voice of an ancient and powerful wizard bellowed a terrible incantation, and a great blast of white-golden ﬁre shot out of the hole in
Azkaban’s wall, shapeless for only a moment before it began to form
wings.
Is...
And the Aurors activated the Anti-Anti-Gravity Jinx that had been
built into the wards of Azkaban, disabling all ﬂying spells whose enchantment had not been cast with the recently changed passphrase.
The lift on Harry’s broom switched oﬀ.
Gravity, on the other hand, stayed on.
Their broom’s upward rise slowed, started to decelerate, began the
process of turning into a fall.
My...
But the enchantments that kept the broom pointed in a direction
and allowed steering, the enchantments that kept the riders attached and
somewhat protected them from acceleration, those enchantments were
still functioning.
Broomstick!
*

933 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Harry hit the ignition switch on the General Technics made, model
Berserker pfrc, n-class, ammonium perchlorate composite propellant,
solid-fuel rocket that had been mated to his Nimbus x200 two-person
broomstick.
And there was noise.

*

934 *

CHAPTER

FIFT Y-NINE

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART IX
,
:
CURIOSIT Y
roomsticks had been invented during what a Muggle would have
called the Dark Ages, supposedly by a legendary witch named Celestria Relevo, allegedly the great-great-granddaughter of Merlin.
Celestria Relevo, or whichever person or group had really invented
those enchantments, hadn’t known a darned thing about Newtonian mechanics.
Broomsticks, therefore, worked by Aristotelian physics.
They went where you pointed them.
If you wanted to move straight forward, you pointed them straight
forward; you didn’t worry about keeping some of the thrust going downward to cancel out the eﬀect of gravity.
If you turned a broomstick, all of its new velocity was in the new
direction of pointing, it didn’t go sideways based on its old momentum.
Broomsticks had maximum speeds, not maximum accelerations.
Not because of anything to do with air resistance, but because a broomstick had some maximum Aristotelian impetus its enchantments could
exert.
Harry had never explicitly noticed that before, despite being dextrous enough to get the best grades in ﬂying class. Broomsticks worked
so much like the human mind instinctively expected them to work that his
brain had managed to entirely overlook their physical absurdity. Harry, on
his ﬁrst Thursday of broomstick lessons, had been distracted by more

B

*

935 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-NINE

*
*

*

interesting-seeming phenomena, words written on paper and a glowing
red ball. So his brain had simply suspended its disbelief, marked the reality of broomsticks as accepted, and proceeded to have its fun, without
ever once thinking of the question whose answer would have been obvious. For it is a sad fact that we only ever think about a tiny fraction of
all the phenomena we encounter...
That is the story of how Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres was almost
killed by his own lack of curiosity.
Because rockets did not work by Aristotelian physics.
Rockets did not work like a human mind instinctively thought a ﬂying thing should work.
A rocket-assisted broomstick, therefore, did not move like the magical broomsticks upon which Harry was such a very good ﬂyer.
None of this actually went through Harry’s mind at the time.
For one thing, the loudest noise he’d ever heard in his life was preventing him from hearing himself think.
For another thing, accelerating upward at four gravities meant that
he had around two and a half seconds, total, to go from the bottom to
the top of Azkaban.
And even if they were two and a half of the longest seconds in the
history of Time, that wasn’t enough room to do much thinking.
There was time only to see the lights of the Aurors’ curses arrowing
down at him, slightly angle the broomstick to avoid them, realize that
the broomstick was simply continuing on with mostly the same momentum instead of going in the direction he pointed it, and activate the
wordless concepts
*crap*
and
*Newton*
whereupon Harry angled the broomstick much harder and then they
started to very quickly approach the wall so he angled it back the other
way and there were more lights coming down and the Dementors were
sliding smoothly up toward them along with some kind of giant winged
creature of white-golden ﬂame so Harry wrenched the broomstick back
toward the sky but now he was still sliding toward another wall so he
*

936 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT IX
:
CURIOSIT Y

*
*

*

tilted the broom slightly and he stopped approaching but he was too
close so he tilted it again and then the distant Aurors on their broomsticks weren’t very distant at all and he was going to crash into that
woman so he spun his broomstick straight away from her and then
in another instant he realized his rocket was an extremely powerful
ﬂamethrower and in a fraction of a second it would be pointing directly
at the Auror so he spun the broomstick sideways as he kept going up
and he couldn’t remember if it was pointing at any Aurors now but at
least it wasn’t pointing at her
Harry missed another Auror by about a meter, zipping past him on
a sideways-pointed ﬂamethrower moving upward at, Harry would later
guess, around 300 kilometers per hour.
If there were any screams of roasted Aurors he didn’t hear them, but
this was not evidence one way or another, because all that Harry was
hearing at the moment was an extremely loud noise.
A couple of calmer if not quieter seconds later, there didn’t seem to be
any Aurors around, or any Dementors, or any giant winged ﬂame creatures, and the vast and terrible ediﬁce of Azkaban looked surprisingly
tiny from this height.
Harry got the broomstick pointed toward the Sun, faintly visible
through the clouds, it wasn’t high in the sky at this time of day and
month of winter, and the broomstick accelerated for another two seconds in that direction and picked up an amazing amount of speed very
quickly before the solid-fuel rocket burned itself out.
After that, once Harry could hear himself think again, when there
was only the howling wind from their ridiculous speed, and Harry’s
enchantment-assisted ﬁngers gripping the broomstick were merely resisting the decelerating drag of moving way faster than terminal velocity, that was when Harry actually thought all that stuﬀ about Newtonian
mechanics and Aristotelian physics and broomsticks and rocketry and
the importance of curiosity and how he was never going to do anything
this Gryﬃndor ever again or at least not until after he learned the Dark
Lord’s secret of immortality and why had he listened to Professor Quirinus “I asssure you, boy, I would not attempt thisss if I did not anticipate
my own ssurvival” Quirrell instead of Professor Michael “Son, if you try
*

937 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-NINE

*
*

*

anything to do with rockets on your own, I mean anything whatsoever
without a trained professonal watching, you will die and that will make
Mum sad” Verres-Evans.

**
*
“What?” shrieked Amelia at the mirror.

**
*
The wind had died down to a bearable level as the air resistance slowed
them, giving Harry plenty of opportunity to listen to the buzzing, ringing sound that seemed to ﬁll his whole brain.
Professor Quirrell had been supposed to cast a Quieting Charm
on the rocket exhaust... apparently there were limits to what Quieting
Charms could do... in retrospect, Harry should have Transﬁgured a pair
of earplugs, not just trusted to the Quieting Charm, though that probably wouldn’t have been enough either...
Well, magical healing probably had something to treat permanent
hearing damage.
No, really, magical healing probably had something to treat that.
He’d seen students go to Madam Pomfrey with injuries that sounded a
lot worse...
Is there some way of transplanting an imaginary personality to someone
else’s head? asked Huﬄepuﬀ. I don’t want to live in yours anymore.
Harry shoved it all into the back of his mind, there really wasn’t
anything he could do about it right now. Was there anything he should
be worrying about—
Then Harry glanced behind him, remembering for the ﬁrst time to
check whether Bellatrix or Professor Quirrell had been blown oﬀ the
broomstick.
But the green snake was still in its harness, and the emaciated woman
was still clinging to the broomstick, her face still charged with unhealthy color and her eyes still bright and dangerous. Her shoulders
*

938 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT IX
:
CURIOSIT Y

*
*

*

were shaking like she was laughing hysterically, and her lips were moving as though to shout, but no sound was coming out—
Oh, right.
Harry took oﬀ the hood of his cloak, tapped his ears to let her know
he couldn’t hear.
Whereupon Bellatrix grasped her wand, pointed it at Harry, and suddenly the ringing in his ears diminished, he could hear her.
A moment later he regretted it; the imprecations she was screaming
at Azkaban, Dementors, Aurors, Dumbledore, Lucius, Bartemy Couch,
something called the Order of the Phoenix, and all who stood in the
way of her Dark Lord, et cetera, were not suitable for younger and more
sensitive listeners; and her laughter was hurting his newly healed ears.
“Enough, Bella,” Harry ﬁnally said, and her voice stopped on the
instant.
There was a pause. Harry pulled the Cloak back over his head, just
on general principles; and realized in the same instant that they might
have telescopes down there or something, in retrospect pulling down his
hood for even a moment had been an incredibly dumb move, he hoped
the whole mission didn’t end up failing because of that one error...
We’re not really cut out for this, are we? observed Slytherin.
Hey, Huﬄepuﬀ objected in sheer reﬂex, we can’t expect to do anything
perfectly the ﬁrst time, we probably just need more practice forget I said that.
Harry looked back again, saw Bellatrix looking around with a puzzled, wondering look on her face. Her head kept turning, turning.
And ﬁnally Bellatrix said, her voice now lower, “My Lord, where are
we?”
What do you mean? was what Harry wanted to say, but the Dark
Lord would never admit to not understanding anything, so Harry
replied, dryly, “We are on a broomstick.”
Does she think she’s dead, that this is Heaven?
Bellatrix’s hands were still chained to the broomstick, so it was only
a ﬁnger that came up and pointed when she said, “What is that?”
Harry followed the direction of her ﬁnger and saw... nothing in particular, actually...
Then Harry realized. After they’d gone up high enough, there
*

939 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-NINE

*
*

*

hadn’t been any clouds to obscure it any more.
“That is the Sun, dear Bella.”
It came out remarkably controlled, the Dark Lord sounding perfectly
calm and maybe a little impatient with her, even as the tears started down
Harry’s cheeks.
In the endless cold, in the pitch blackness, the Sun would surely have
been...
A happy memory...
Bellatrix’s head kept turning.
“And the ﬂuﬀy things?” she said.
“Clouds.”
There was a pause, and then Bellatrix said, “But what are they?”
Harry didn’t answer her, there was no way his voice could have been
steady, would have been steady, it was all he could do to keep his breathing perfectly regular while he cried.
After a while, Bellatrix breathed, so softly Harry almost didn’t hear,
“Pretty...”
Her face slowly relaxed, the color leaving its paleness almost as
quickly as it had arrived.
Her skeletal body slumped down against the broomstick.
The borrowed wand dangled lifelessly from the strap attached to her
unmoving hand.
You have got to be kidding—
Harry’s mind remembered then, the Pepper-Up potion came at a
cost; Bellatrix would ssleep for a conssiderable time, Professor Quirrell
had said.
And in the same instant another part of Harry became utterly convinced, looking back at the chalk-white emaciated woman, seeming
deader in the bright sunlight than anything Harry had ever seen alive,
that she was dead, that she had just uttered her last word, that Professor
Quirrell had misjudged the dosage—
—or deliberately sacriﬁced Bellatrix to guard their own escape—
Is she breathing?
Harry couldn’t see if she was breathing.
There was no way, on the broomstick, to reach back and take her
*

940 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT IX
:
CURIOSIT Y

*
*

*

pulse.
Harry looked ahead to make sure they weren’t about to run into
any ﬂying rocks, kept on steering the broomstick toward the Sun, the
invisible boy and the possibly dead woman riding oﬀ into the afternoon,
while his ﬁngers gripped the wood so hard they turned white.
He couldn’t reach back and perform artiﬁcial respiration.
He couldn’t use anything from his healer’s kit.
Trust Professor Quirrell to have not endangered her?
Strange, it was strange, that even genuinely believing that Professor
Quirrell hadn’t meant to kill the Auror (for it would have been stupid),
thinking of the Defense Professor’s reassurances no longer felt reassuring.
Then it occurred to Harry that he had yet to check—
Harry looked back, and hissed, “Teacher?”
The snake did not stir within its harness, and said no word.
...maybe the snake, not being an actual rider, hadn’t been protected
from the acceleration. Or maybe coming that close to the Dementors
without a shield, even for a moment in Animagus form, had knocked
out the Defense Professor.
That wasn’t good.
It was to have been Professor Quirrell who told Harry when it was
safe to use the portkey.
Harry steered the broomstick with whitened ﬁngers, and thought, he
thought very hard for a small unmeasured length of time, during which
Bellatrix might or might not have been breathing, during which Professor Quirrell himself might have already been not-breathing for a while.
And Harry decided that while it was possible to recover from the
error of wasting the portkey in his possession, it was not possible to
recover from the error of letting a brain go too long without oxygen.
So Harry took the next portkey in the sequence from his pouch, as
he slowed his broomstick to a halt in the bright blue air (Harry didn’t
know, when he thought about it, whether a portkey’s ability to adjust
for the Earth’s rotation also included the ability to match velocity in general with its new surroundings), touched the portkey to the broomstick,
and...
*

941 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-NINE

*
*

*

Harry paused, still holding the twig, the mate of the twig he had
snapped what seemed like two weeks ago. He was feeling a sudden reluctance; his brain seemed to have learned the rule, by some purely neural
process of negative reinforcement, that Snapping Twigs Is A Bad Idea.
But that wasn’t actually logical, so Harry snapped the twig anyway.

**
*
There was a thunderous boom from behind the nearby metal door, causing Amelia to drop the mirror she was holding and spin around with her
wand in hand, and then that door burst open to reveal Albus Dumbledore, standing there in front of a great smoking hole in the prison wall.
“Amelia,” said the old wizard. There was no trace of any of his customary levity, his eyes were hard as sapphires beneath his half-moon
glasses. “I must leave Azkaban and I must do so now. Is there any faster
way than a broomstick to get beyond the wards?”
“No—”
“Then I require your fastest broomstick, at once!”
The place where Amelia wanted to be was with the Auror who had
been injured by that Fiendfyre or whatever it had been.
What she needed to do was ﬁnd out what Dumbledore knew.
“You!” the old witch barked at the team around her. “Keep clearing
the corridors until you’re at bottom, they may not all have escaped yet!”
And then, to the old wizard, “Two broomsticks. You can brief me once
we’re in the air.”
There was a match of stares, but not a long one.

**
*
A sickeningly hard yank caught at Harry’s abdomen, considerably
harder than the yank that had transported him to Azkaban, and this
time the distance traversed was great enough that he could hear an instant of silence, watch the unseeable space between spaces, in the crack
*

942 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT IX
:
CURIOSIT Y

*
*

*

between one place and another.

**
*
The Sun, which had shone on the two only brieﬂy, was swiftly occluded
by a raincloud as they shot away from Azkaban, in the direction of the
wind and faster than the wind.
“Who’s behind it?” shouted Amelia to the broomstick ﬂying a pace
away from her.
“One of two people,” Dumbledore said back, “I know not, at this
instant, who. If the ﬁrst, then we are in trouble. If the second, we are
all in far greater trouble.”
Amelia didn’t spare any breath for sighs. “When will you know?”
The old wizard’s voice was grim, quiet and yet somehow rising above
the wind. “Three things they need for perfection, if it is that one: The
ﬂesh of the Dark Lord’s most faithful servant, the blood of the Dark
Lord’s greatest foe, and access to a certain grave. I had thought Harry
Potter safe, with their attempt on Azkaban all but failed—though I still
set guards upon him—but now I am fearful indeed. They have access to
Time, someone with a Time-Turner is sending messages for them; and
I suspect the kidnap attempt on Harry Potter has already taken place
some hours ago. Which is why we have not heard about it, being in
Azkaban where Time cannot knot itself. That past came after our own
future, you see.”
“And if it is the other?” shouted Amelia. What she had heard already
was worrying enough; that sounded like the darkest of Dark rituals, and
centering on the dead Dark Lord himself.
The old wizard, his face now even grimmer, said nothing, only shook
his head.

**
*
When the portkey’s yank had subsided, the Sun was only just peeking
over the horizon, looking more like dawn than sunset, as their broom
*

943 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-NINE

*
*

*

hovered low above a brief expanse of dark-orange rock and sand, arranged into lumpy hills like someone had kneaded the land’s dough a
few times and then forgotten to roll it ﬂat. In the near distance, waves
rolled past in an endless vista of water, though the ground over which
the broomstick hovered was above sea level by meters at the least.
Harry blinked at the dawn colors, and then realized the portkey had
been international.
“Oy!” came a brisk, female shout from behind him, and Harry spun
the broomstick to look. A middle-aged lady was holding up one hand
to her mouth in a deliberate calling gesture, and bustling forward. Her
kindly features, narrow eyes, and umber skin marked a race unfamiliar to
Harry; she was clad in brilliant purple robes of a style Harry had never
seen before; and when her lips opened again she spoke with an accent
that Harry couldn’t place, for he was not widely traveled. “Where were
you? You’re two hours late! I almost gave up on the lot of you... hello?”
There was a brief pause. Harry’s thoughts seemed to be moving
oddly, too slow, everything felt distant, like there was a thick pane of
glass between himself and the world, and another thick pane of glass between himself and his feelings, so that he could see, but not touch. It
had come over him upon seeing the dawn’s light and the kindly witch,
and thinking that it all seemed like a proper end to the adventure.
Then the witch was rushing forward and drawing her wand; a muttered word severed the cuﬀs that bound the emaciated woman to the
broomstick, and Bellatrix was being ﬂoated down onto the sandy rock
with her skeletal arms and pale legs dangling like lifeless things. “Oh,
Merlin,” whispered the witch, “Merlin, Merlin, Merlin...”
She appears concerned, thought an abstract, distant thing between two
panes of glass. Is that what a real healer would say, or is it what someone
told to put on a performance would say?
As though it wasn’t Harry who spoke, but some other part of himself
behind yet another pane of glass, a whisper came from his lips. “The
green snake on her back is an Animagus.” Not high the whisper, not
cold, only quiet. “He is unconscious.”
The witch’s head twitched up, to look at where that voice had seemed
to speak out of empty air, and then looked back down at Bellatrix.
*

944 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT IX
:
CURIOSIT Y

*
*

*

“You’re not Mister Jaﬀe.”
“That would be the Animagus,” whispered Harry’s lips. Oh, thought
the Harry behind glass, listening to the sound of his own lips, that makes
sense; Professor Quirrell must have used a diﬀerent name.
“Since when is he a—bah, forget it.” The witch laid her wand on
the snake’s nose for a moment, then shook her head sharply. “Nothing
wrong with him that a day’s rest won’t cure. Her...”
“Can you wake him up now?” whispered Harry’s lips. Is that a good
idea? thought Harry, but his lips deﬁnitely seemed to think so.
Again the sharp headshake. “If an Innervate didn’t work on him—”
began the witch.
“I did not attempt one,” whispered Harry’s lips.
“What? Why—oh, never mind. Innervate.”
There was a pause, and then a snake slowly crawled out of its harness.
Slowly the green head came up, looked around.
A blur later, Professor Quirrell was standing, and a moment later
had sagged to his knees.
“Lie down,” said the witch without looking up from Bellatrix. “That
you in there, Jeremy?”
“Yes,” said the Defense Professor rather hoarsely, as he carefully laid
himself down on a relatively ﬂat patch of sandy orange rock. He was
not so pale as Bellatrix, but his face was bloodless in the dim dawn light.
“Salutations, Miss Camblebunker.”
“I told you,” said the witch, sharpness in her voice and a slight smile
on her face, “call me Crystal, this isn’t Britain and we’ll have none of
your formality here. And it’s Doctor now, not Miss.”
“My apologies, Doctor Camblebunker.” This was followed by a dry
chuckle.
The witch’s smile grew a little wider, her voice that much sharper.
“Who’s your friend?”
“You don’t need to know.” The Defense Professor’s eyes were closed,
where he lay on the ground.
“How wrong did it go?”
Very dryly indeed: “You can read about it tomorrow in any newspaper with an international section.”
*

945 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-NINE

*
*

*

The witch’s wand was tapping here, there, poking and prodding all
over Bellatrix’s body. “I missed you, Jeremy.”
“Truly?” said the Defense Professor, sounding slightly surprised.
“Not even a tiny little bit. If I didn’t owe you—”
The Defense Professor started to laugh, and then it turned into more
of a coughing ﬁt.
What do you think? said Slytherin to the Inner Critic, while Harry
listened from behind the glass walls. Performance, or reality?
Can’t tell, said Harry’s Inner Critic. I’m not in top critical form right
now.
Can anyone think of a good probe to gather more information? said
Ravenclaw.
Again that whisper from the empty air above the broomstick: “What
is the chance of undoing all that was done to her?”
“Oh, let’s see. Legilimency and unknown Dark rituals, ten years for
that to set in place, followed by ten years of Dementor exposure? Undo
that? You’re out of your skull, Mister Whoever-You-Are. The question
is whether there’s anything left, and I’d call that maybe one chance in
three—” The witch suddenly cut herself oﬀ. Her voice, when it spoke
again, was quieter. “If you were her friend, before... then no, you’re
never getting her back. Best understand that now.”
I’m voting that this is a performance, said the Inner Critic. She
wouldn’t just blurt all that out in response to one question unless she was
looking for an opportunity.
Noted, but I’m putting a low weight of conﬁdence on that, said Ravenclaw. It’s very hard not to let your suspicions control your perceptions when
you’re trying to weigh evidence that subtle.
“What potion did you give her?” the witch said after opening Bellatrix’s mouth and peering inside, her wand ﬂashing multiple colors of
illumination.
The man lying on the ground calmly said, “Pepper-Up—”
“Were you out of your mind?”
Again the coughing laugh.
“She’ll sleep for a week if she’s lucky,” the witch said, and clucked
her tongue. “I’ll owl you when she opens her eyes, I suppose, so you
*

946 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT IX
:
CURIOSIT Y

*
*

*

can come back and talk her into that Unbreakable Vow. Have you got
anything to stop her from killing me on the spot, if she manages to even
move for another month?”
The Defense Professor, eyes still closed, took a sheet of paper from
his robes; a moment later, words began to appear on it, accompanied
by tiny wisps of smoke. When the smoke had stopped rising, the paper
ﬂoated over toward the woman.
The woman looked over the paper with raised eyebrows, gave a sardonic snort. “This had better work, Jeremy, or my last will and testament says that my whole estate goes into putting a bounty on your head.
Speaking of which—”
The Defense Professor reached again into his robes and tossed the
witch a bag that made a clinking sound. The witch caught it, weighed
it, made a pleased sound.
Then she stood up, and the pale skeletal woman ﬂoated oﬀ the
ground beside her. “I’m heading back,” said the witch. “I can’t start
my work here.”
“Wait,” said the Defense Professor, and with a gesture retrieved his
wand from Bellatrix’s hand and harness. Then his hand pointed the
wand at Bellatrix, and moved in a small circular gesture, accompanied
by a quiet, “Obliviate.”
“That’s it,” snapped the witch, “I’m taking her out of here before
anyone does her any more damage—” One arm came around to hug the
bony form of Bellatrix Black to her side, and they both disappeared with
the loud pop! of Apparition.
And there was silence in that lumpy place, but for the gentle rush of
the passing waves, and a little breath of wind.
I think the performance is ﬁnished, said the Inner Critic. I give it two
and a half out of ﬁve stars. She’s probably not a very experienced actor.
I wonder if a real healer would seem more fake than an actor told to
play one? mused Ravenclaw.
Like watching a television show, that was how it felt, like watching
a television show whose characters you didn’t particularly empathize
with, that was all that could be seen and felt from behind the glass walls.
*

947 *

**
*

CHAPTER FIFT Y-NINE

*
*

*

Somehow, Harry managed to move his lips himself, send his own
voice out into the still dawn air, and then was surprised to hear his own
question. “How many diﬀerent people are you, anyway?”
The pale man lying on the ground didn’t laugh, but from the broomstick Harry’s eyes saw the sides of Professor Quirrell’s lips curling up,
the edge of that familiar sardonic smile. “I cannot say that I bothered
keeping count. How many are you?”
It shouldn’t have shaken the inner Harry so much, hearing that response, and yet he felt—he felt—unstable, like his own center had been
subtracted—
Oh.
“Excuse me,” said Harry’s voice. It now sounded as distant and detached as the fading Harry felt. “I’m going to faint in a few seconds, I
think.”
“Use the fourth portkey I gave you, the one I said was our fallback
refuge,” said the man lying on the ground, calmly but swiftly. “It will
be safer there. And continue wearing your cloak.”
Harry’s free hand retrieved another twig from his pouch and snapped
it.
There was another portkey yank, internationally long, and then he
was somewhere black.
“Lumos,” said Harry’s lips, some part of him looking out for the
safety of the whole.
He was inside what looked like a Muggle warehouse, a deserted one.
Harry’s legs climbed oﬀ the broomstick, lay on the ﬂoor. His eyes
closed, and some tidy fraction of self willed his light to fail, before the
darkness took him.

**
*
“Where will you go?” yelled Amelia. They were almost at the edge of
the wards.
“Backward in time to protect Harry Potter,” said the old wizard, and
before Amelia could even open her lips to ask if he wanted help, she felt
the boundary of the wards as they crossed them.
*

948 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT IX
:
CURIOSIT Y

*
*

*

There was a pop of Apparition, and the wizard and the phoenix vanished, leaving behind the borrowed broomstick.

*

949 *

CHAPTER

SIXT Y

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART X
,

“W

ake.”
Harry’s eyes ﬂew open as he came awake with a choking gasp,
a jerking start of his prone body. He couldn’t remember any dreams,
maybe his brain had been too exhausted to dream, it seemed like he’d
only closed his eyes and then heard that word spoken a moment after.
“You must awaken,” said the voice of Quirinus Quirrell. “I gave you
as much time as I could, but it would be wise to reserve at least one
use of your Time-Turner. Soon we must go backward four hours to
Mary’s Place, appearing in every way as though we have done nothing
interesting this day. I wished to speak to you before then.”
Harry slowly sat up in the midst of darkness. His body ached, and
not only in the places where it had laid on the hard concrete. Images tumbled over each other in his memory, everything his unconscious brain
had been too tired to discharge into a proper nightmare.
Twelve terrible voids ﬂoating down a metal corridor, tarnishing the
metal around them, light dimmed and temperature falling as the emptiness tried to suck all life out of the world—
Chalk-white skin, stretched just above the bone that had remained
after fat and muscle faded—
A metal door—
A woman’s voice—
No, I didn’t mean it, please don’t die—
I can’t remember my children’s names any more—
*

951

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y

*
*

*

Don’t go, don’t take it away, don’t don’t don’t—
“What was that place?” Harry said hoarsely, in a voice pushed out of
his throat like water forced through a too-thin pipe, in the darkness it
sounded almost as shattered as Bellatrix Black’s voice had been. “What
was that place? That wasn’t a prison, that was hell!”
“Hell?” said the calm voice of the Defense Professor. “You mean the
Christian punishment fantasy? I suppose there is a similarity.”
“How—” Harry’s voice was blocking, there was something huge
lodged in his throat. “How—how could they—” People had built
that place, someone had made Azkaban, they’d made it on purpose,
they’d done it deliberately, that woman, she’d had children, children she
wouldn’t remember, some judge had decided for that to happen to her,
someone had needed to drag her into that cell and lock its door while she
screamed, someone fed her every day and walked away without letting
her out—
“How could people do that?”
“Why shouldn’t they?” said the Defense Professor. A pale blue light
lit the warehouse, then, showing a high, cavernous concrete ceiling, and
a dusty concrete ﬂoor; and Professor Quirrell sitting some distance away
from Harry, leaning his back against a painted wall; the pale blue light
turned the walls to glacier surfaces, the dust on the ﬂoor to speckled
snow, and the man himself had become an ice sculpture, shrouded in
darkness where his black robes lay over him. “What use are the prisoners
of Azkaban to them?”
Harry’s mouth opened in a croak. No words exited.
A faint smile twitched on the Defense Professor’s lips. “You know,
Mr. Potter, if He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named had come to rule over magical Britain, and built such a place as Azkaban, he would have built it
because he enjoyed seeing his enemies suﬀer. And if instead he began to
ﬁnd their suﬀering distasteful, why, he would order Azkaban torn down
the next day. As for those who did make Azkaban, and those who do
not tear it down, while preaching lofty sermons and imagining themselves not to be villains... well, Mr. Potter, I think if I had my choice of
taking tea with them, or taking tea with You-Know-Who, I should ﬁnd
my sensibilities less oﬀended by the Dark Lord.”
*

952 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT X

*
*

*

“I don’t understand,” Harry said, his voice was shaking, he’d read
about the classic experiment on the psychology of prisons, the ordinary
college students who had turned sadistic as soon as they were assigned
the role of prison guards; only now he realized that the experiment
hadn’t examined the right question, the one most important question,
they hadn’t looked at the key people, not the prison guards but everyone
else, “I really don’t understand, Professor Quirrell, how can people just
stand by and let this happen, why is the country of magical Britain doing
this—” Harry’s voice stopped.
The Defense Professor’s eyes appeared to be the same color as always,
in the pale blue light, for that light was the same color as Quirinus Quirrell’s irises, those never-thawing chips of ice. “Welcome, Mr. Potter, to
your ﬁrst encounter with the realities of politics. What do the wretched
creatures in Azkaban have to oﬀer any faction? Who would beneﬁt from
aiding them? A politician who openly sided with them would associate
themselves with criminals, with weakness, with distasteful things that
people would rather not think about. Alternatively, the politician could
demonstrate their might and cruelty by calling for longer sentences; to
make a display of strength requires a victim to crush beneath you, after
all. And the populace applauds, for it is their instinct to back the winner.” A coldly amused laugh. “You see, Mr. Potter, no one ever quite
believes that they will go to Azkaban, so they see no harm in it for themselves. As for what they inﬂict on others... I suppose you were once
told that people care about that sort of thing? It is a lie, Mr. Potter, people don’t care in the slightest, and if you had not led a vastly sheltered
childhood you would have noticed that long ago. Console yourself with
this: those now prisoner in Azkaban voted for the same Ministers of
Magic who pledged to move their cells closer to the Dementors. I admit, Mr. Potter, that I see little hope for democracy as an eﬀective form
of government, but I admire the poetry of how it makes its victims complicit in their own destruction.”
Harry’s recently cohered self was threatening to shatter into fragments again, the words falling like hammerstrikes on his consciousness,
driving him back, step by step, over the precipice where lurked some
vast abyss; and he was trying to ﬁnd something to save himself, some
*

953 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y

*
*

*

clever retort that would refute the words, but it did not come.
The Defense Professor watched Harry, the gaze reﬂecting more curiosity than command. “It is very simple, Mr. Potter, to understand how
Azkaban was built, and how it continues to be. Men care for what they,
themselves, expect to suﬀer or gain; and so long as they do not expect
it to redound upon themselves, their cruelty and carelessness is without
limit. All the other wizards of this country are no diﬀerent within than
he who sought to rule over them, You-Know-Who; they only lack his
power and his... frankness.”
The boy’s hands were clenched into ﬁsts so tightly that the nails cut
into his palm, if his ﬁngers were white or his face was pale you couldn’t
have seen that, for the dim blue light cast all into ice or shadow. “You
once oﬀered to support me if my ambition were to be the next Dark
Lord. Is that why, Professor?”
The Defense Professor inclined his head, a thin smile on his lips.
“Learn all that I have to teach you, Mr. Potter, and you will rule this
country in time. Then you may tear down the prison that democracy
made, if you ﬁnd that Azkaban still oﬀends your sensibilities. Like it or
not, Mr. Potter, you have seen this day that your own will conﬂicts with
the will of this country’s populace, and that you do not bow your head
and submit to their decision when that occurs. So to them, whether or
not they know it, and whether or not you acknowledge it, you are their
next Dark Lord.”
In the monochromatic light, unwavering, the boy and the Defense
Professor both seemed like motionless ice sculptures, the irises of their
eyes reduced to similar colors, looking very much the same in that light.
Harry stared directly into those pale eyes. All the long-suppressed
questions, the ones he’d told himself he was putting on hold until the
Ides of May. That had been a lie, Harry now knew, a self-deception, he
had kept silent for fear of what he might hear. And now everything was
coming forth from his lips, all at once. “On our ﬁrst day of class, you
tried to convince my classmates I was a killer.”
“You are.” Amusedly. “But if your question is why I told them that,
Mr. Potter, the answer is that you will ﬁnd ambiguity a great ally on
your road to power. Give a sign of Slytherin on one day, and contradict
*

954 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT X

*
*

*

it with a sign of Gryﬃndor the next; and the Slytherins will be enabled
to believe what they wish, while the Gryﬃndors argue themselves into
supporting you as well. So long as there is uncertainty, people can believe whatever seems to be to their own advantage. And so long as you
appear strong, so long as you appear to be winning, their instincts will
tell them that their advantage lies with you. Walk always in the shadow,
and light and darkness both will follow.”
“And,” said the boy, his voice level, “just what do you want out of all
this?”
Professor Quirrell had leaned further back against the wall from
where he sat, casting his face into shadow, his eyes changing from pale
ice into dark pits like those of his snake form. “I wish for Britain to
grow strong under a strong leader; that is my desire. As for my reasons
why,” Professor Quirrell smiled without mirth, “I think they shall stay
my own.”
“The sense of doom that I feel around you.” The words were becoming harder and harder to say, as the subject danced closer and closer to
something terrible and forbidden. “You always knew what it meant.”
“I had several guesses,” said Professor Quirrell, his expression unreadable. “And I will not yet say all I guessed. But this much I will tell
you: it is your doom which ﬂares when we come near, not mine.”
For once Harry’s brain managed to mark this as a questionable assertion and possible lie, instead of believing everything it heard. “Why
do you sometimes turn into a zombie?”
“Personal reasons,” said Professor Quirrell with no humor at all in
his voice.
“What was your ulterior motive for rescuing Bellatrix?”
There was a brief silence, during which Harry tried hard to control
his breathing, keep it steady.
Finally the Defense Professor shrugged, as though it were of no account. “I all but spelled it out for you, Mr. Potter. I told you everything
you needed to deduce the answer, if you had been mature enough to
consider that ﬁrst obvious question. Bellatrix Black was the Dark Lord’s
most powerful servant, her loyalty the most assured; she was the single
person most likely to be entrusted with some part of the lost lore of
*

955 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y

*
*

*

Slytherin that should have been yours.”
Slowly the anger crept over Harry, slowly the wrath, something terrible beginning to boil his blood, in just a few moments he would say
something that he really shouldn’t say while the two of them were alone
in a deserted warehouse—
“But she was innocent,” said the Defense Professor. He was not smiling. “And the degree to which all her choices were taken away from her,
so that she never had a chance to suﬀer for her own mistakes... it struck
me as excessive, Mr. Potter. If she tells you nothing of use—” The Defense Professor gave another small shrug. “I shall not consider this day’s
work a waste.”
“How altruistic of you,” Harry said coldly. “So if all wizards are like
You-Know-Who inside, are you an exception to that, then?”
The Defense Professor’s eyes were still in shadow, dark pits that could
not be met. “Call it a whim, Mr. Potter. It has sometimes amused me
to play the part of a hero. Who knows but that You-Know-Who would
say the same.”
Harry opened his mouth a ﬁnal time—
And found that he couldn’t say it, he couldn’t ask the last question,
the last and most important question, he couldn’t make the words come
out. Even though a refusal like that was forbidden to a rationalist, for
all that he’d ever recited the Litany of Tarski or the Litany of Gendlin
or sworn that whatever could be destroyed by the truth should be, in
that one moment, he could not bring himself to say his last question out
loud. Even though he knew he was thinking wrongly, even though he
knew he was supposed to be better than this, he still couldn’t say it.
“Now it is my turn to inquire of you.” Professor Quirrell’s back
straightened from where it had leaned back against the glacier wall of
painted concrete. “I was wondering, Mr. Potter, if you had anything
to say about nearly killing me and ruining our mutual endeavor. I am
given to understand that an apology, in such cases, is considered a sign
of respect. But you have not oﬀered me one. Is it just that you have not
yet gotten around to it, Mr. Potter?”
The tone was calm, the quiet edge so ﬁne and sharp that it would slice
all the way through you before you realized you were being murdered.
*

956 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT X

*
*

*

And Harry just looked at the Defense Professor with cool eyes that
would never ﬂinch from anything; not even death, now. He was no
longer in Azkaban, no longer fearful of the part of himself that was
fearless; and the solid gemstone that was Harry had rotated to meet the
stress, turning smoothly from one facet to another, from light to darkness, warm to cold.
A calculated ploy on his part, to make me feel guilty, put me in a position
where I must submit?
Genuine emotion on his part?
“I see,” said Professor Quirrell. “I suppose that answers—”
“No,” said the boy in a cool, collected voice, “you do not get to frame
the conversation that easily, Professor. I went to considerable lengths to
protect you and get you out of Azkaban safely, after I thought you had
tried to kill a police oﬃcer. That included facing down twelve Dementors without a Patronus Charm. I wonder, if I had apologized when you
demanded it, would you have said thank-you in turn? Or am I correct in
thinking that it was my submission you demanded there, and not only
my respect?”
There was a pause, and then Professor Quirrell’s voice came in reply,
openly icy with danger no longer veiled. “It seems you still cannot bring
yourself to lose, Mr. Potter.”
Darkness stared out of Harry’s eyes without ﬂinching, the Defense
Professor himself reduced to a mortal thing within them. “Oh, and are
you pondering now, whether you should pretend to lose to me, and pretend to humble yourself before my own anger, in order to preserve your
own plans? Did the thought of a calculated false apology even cross your
mind? Me neither, Professor Quirrell.”
The Defense Professor laughed, low and humorless, emptier than
the void between the stars, dangerous as any vacuum ﬁlled with hard
radiation. “No, Mr. Potter, you have not learned your lesson, not at
all.”
“I thought of losing many times, in Azkaban,” said the boy, his voice
level. “That I ought to simply give up, and turn myself over to the Aurors. Losing would have been the sensible thing to do. I heard your voice
saying it to me, in my mind; and I would have done it, if I had been there
*

957 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y

*
*

*

by myself. But I could not bring myself to lose you.”
There was silence, then, for a time; as though even the Defense Professor could not quite think of what to say to that.
“I am curious,” said Professor Quirrell at last. “What do you think
that I should apologize for, precisely? I gave you explicit instructions in
the event of a ﬁght. You were to stay down, stay out of the way, cast no
magic. You violated those instructions and brought down the mission.”
“I made no decision,” the boy said evenly, “there was no choice in it,
only a wish that the Auror should not die, and my Patronus was there.
For that wish to have never occurred, you should have warned me that
you might bluﬀ using a Killing Curse. By default, I assume that if you
point your wand at someone and say Avada Kedavra, it is because you
want them dead. Shouldn’t that be the ﬁrst rule of Unforgivable Curse
Safety?”
“Rules are for duels,” said the Defense Professor. Some of the coldness had returned to his voice. “And dueling is a sport, not a branch of
Battle Magic. In a real ﬁght, a curse which cannot be blocked and must
be dodged is an indispensable tactic. I would have thought this obvious
to you, but it seems I misjudged your intellect.”
“It also seems to me imprudent,” said the boy, continuing as though
the other had not spoken, “to not tell me that my casting any spell on
you might kill us both. What if you had suﬀered some mishap, and
I had tried an Innervate, or a Hover Charm? That ignorance, which
you permitted for purposes I cannot guess, played also some part in this
catastrophe.”
There was another silence. The Defense Professor’s eyes had narrowed, and there was a faintly puzzled look on his face, as though he
had encountered some completely unfamiliar situation; and still the man
spoke no word.
“Well,” said the boy. His eyes had not wavered from the Defense
Professor’s. “I certainly regret hurting you, Professor. But I do not think
the situation calls for me to submit to you. I never really did understand
the concept of apology, still less as it applies to a situation like this; if
you have my regrets, but not my submission, does that count as saying
sorry?”
*

958 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT X

*
*

*

Again that cold, cold laugh, darker than the void between the stars.
“I wouldn’t know,” said the Defense Professor, “I, too, never understood the concept of apology. That ploy would be futile between us, it
seems, with both of us knowing it for a lie. Let us speak no more of it,
then. Debts will be settled between us in time.”
There was silence for a time.
“By the way,” said the boy. “Hermione Granger would never have
built Azkaban, no matter who was going to be put in it. And she’d die
before she hurt an innocent. Just mentioning that, since you said before
that all wizards are like You-Know-Who inside, and that’s just false as a
point of simple fact. Would’ve realized it earlier if I hadn’t been,” the
boy gave a brief grim smile, “stressed out.”
The Defense Professor’s eyes were half-lidded, his expression distant.
“People’s insides are not always like their outsides, Mr. Potter. Perhaps
she simply wishes others to think of her as a good girl. She cannot use
the Patronus Charm—”
“Hah,” said the boy; his smile seemed realer now, warmer. “She’s
having trouble for exactly the same reason I did. There’s enough light in
her to destroy Dementors, I’m sure. She wouldn’t be able to stop herself
from destroying Dementors, even at the cost of her own life...” The boy
trailed oﬀ, and then his voice resumed. “I might not be such a good
person, maybe; but they do exist, and she’s one of them.”
Dryly. “She is young, and to make a show of kindness costs her
little.”
There was a pause at this. Then the boy said, “Professor, I have to
ask, when you see something all dark and gloomy, doesn’t it ever occur
to you to try and improve it somehow? Like, yes, something goes terribly wrong in people’s heads that makes them think it’s great to torture
criminals, but that doesn’t mean they’re truly evil inside; and maybe if
you taught them the right things, showed them what they were doing
wrong, you could change—”
Professor Quirrell laughed, then, and not with the emptiness of before. “Ah, Mr. Potter, sometimes I do forget how very young you are.
Sooner you could change the color of the sky.” Another chuckle, this
one colder. “And the reason it is easy for you to forgive such fools and
*

959 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y

*
*

*

think well of them, Mr. Potter, is that you yourself have not been sorely
hurt. You will think less fondly of commonplace idiots after the ﬁrst
time their folly costs you something dear. Such as a hundred Galleons
from your own pocket, perhaps, rather than the agonizing deaths of a
hundred strangers.” The Defense Professor was smiling thinly. He took
a pocket-watch out of his robes, looked at it. “Let us depart now, if there
is nothing more to say between us.”
“You don’t have any questions about the impossible things I did to
get us out of Azkaban?”
“No,” said the Defense Professor. “I believe I have solved most of
them already. As for the rest, it is too rare that I ﬁnd a person whom
I cannot see through immediately, be they friend or foe. I shall unravel
the puzzles about you for myself, in due time.”
The Defense Professor shoved himself up, pushing back on the wall
with both hands and rising to his feet, smoothly if too slowly. The boy,
less gracefully, did the same.
And the boy blurted out the last most terrible question which he had
earlier been unable to ask; as though to say it aloud would make it real,
and as though it were not, already, vastly obvious.
“Why am I not like the other children my own age?”

**
*
In a deserted side-road of Diagon Alley, where scraps of un-Vanished
trash could be seen lodged into the edges of the brick street and the
blank brick building-sides that surrounded it, along with scattered dirt
and other signs of neglect, an ancient wizard and his phoenix Apparated
into existence.
The wizard was already reaching within his robes for his hourglass
when, in habit, his eyes jumped to a random spot between the road and
the wall, to memorize it—
And the old wizard blinked in surprise; there was a scrap of parchment in that spot.
* 960 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT X

*
*

*

A frown crossed Albus Dumbledore’s face as he took a step forward
and took the crumpled scrap, unfolding it.
On it was the single word “No”, and nothing more.
Slowly the wizard let it ﬂutter from his ﬁngers. Absently he reached
down to the pavement, and picked up the nearest scrap of parchment,
which looked remarkably similar to the one he had just taken; he
touched it with his wand, and a moment later it was inscribed with the
same word “No”, in the same handwriting, which was his own.
The old wizard had planned to go back three hours to when Harry
Potter ﬁrst arrived in Diagon Alley. He had already watched, upon his
instruments, the boy leaving Hogwarts, and that could not be undone
(his one attempt to fool his own instruments, and so control Time without altering its appearance to himself, had ended in suﬃcient disaster to
convince him to never again try such trickery). He had hoped to retrieve the boy at the ﬁrst possible moment after his arrival, and take him
to another safe location, if not Hogwarts (for his instruments had not
shown the boy’s return). But now—
“A paradox if I retrieve him immediately after he arrives in Diagon
Alley?” murmured the old wizard to himself. “Perhaps they did not set
in motion their plan to rob Azkaban, until after they had conﬁrmed his
arrival here... or else... perhaps...”

**
*
Painted concrete, hard ﬂoor and distant ceilings, two ﬁgures facing oﬀ
across from each other. One entity who wore the shape of a man in his
late thirties and already balding, and another mind that wore the form
of an eleven-year-old boy with a scar upon his forehead. Ice and shadow,
pale blue light.
“I don’t know,” said the man.
The boy just looked at him. And then said, “Oh, really?”
“Truly,” said the man. “I know nothing, and of my guesses I will not
speak. Yet I will say this much—”

*

961

*

CHAPTER

SIXT Y-ONE

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART XI:
,
SECRECY AND OPENNESS
hrough green ﬂame they whirled, through the Floo network they
spun, Minerva’s heart racing with a pounding horror that she
hadn’t felt in ten years and three months, the corridors between space
coughed and spit them out into the lobby of Gringotts (the safest Floo
receiver in Diagon Alley, the connection most diﬃcult to intercept, the
fastest way out of Hogwarts without a phoenix). A goblin attendant
turned toward them, his eyes widened, he began a slightly respectful
bow—
Determination, Destination, Deliberation!
And the two of them were in the alley just in back of Mary’s Place,
wands already out and raised, spinning around back-to-back and the
words of an Anti-Disillusionment Charm already rising to Severus’s lips.
The alley was empty.
When she turned back to look at Severus, his wand was already cracking down on his own head with a sound like smashing an egg, as his lips
chanted words of invisibility; he took on the colors of his surroundings,
became a blur of his surroundings, the blur moved and matched what
was behind him and then there was nothing there.
She lowered her wand and stepped forward to receive her own Disillusionment—
From behind her, the unmistakable sound of a burst of ﬂame.

T

*

963 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-ONE

*
*

*

She spun and saw Albus there, his long wand already drawn and
raised in his right hand. His eyes were grim beneath the half-circles of his
glasses, and Fawkes upon his shoulder had spread his ﬁre-colored wings
in readiness for ﬂight and ﬁght.
“Albus!” she said. “I thought—” She’d just seen him depart for Azkaban, and she’d thought not even phoenixes could return from there so
easily.
Then she realized.
“She escaped,” said Albus. “Did your Patronus reach him?”
The pounding in her heart grew stronger, the horror in her veins
solidiﬁed. “He said he was here, in the washroom—”
“Let us hope he spoke true,” said Albus, the wand tapped her head
with a sensation like water trickling over her, and a moment later the
four of them (even Fawkes had been rendered invisible, though sometimes you saw a ﬂicker of something like ﬁre in his air) were racing to
the front of the restaurant. They paused before the door while Albus
whispered something, and a moment later one of the customers visible through the windows stood up with a vague look on his face and
opened the door as though taking a quick look outside for some friend;
and the three of them were through, racing past the unwitting customers
(Severus was marking their faces, Minerva knew, and Albus would see
any Disillusioned) toward the sign that pointed to the washroom—
An old wooden door marked with the sign of a toilet burst open with
a slam, and four invisible rescuers stormed through it.
The small but clean wooden room was empty, fresh droplets of water
showed in the sink but there was no sign of Harry, only a sheet of paper
left on the closed lid of the toilet.
She couldn’t breathe.
The sheet of paper rose up into the air as Albus took it, and a moment
later was thrust in her own direction.
M: What did the hat tell me to tell you?
—H
“Ah,” Minerva said aloud in surprise, her mind taking a moment to
place the question, it wasn’t the sort of thing you’d forget but she hadn’t
been thinking in that mode, really—“I’m an impudent youngster and I
*

964 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XI:
SECRECY AND OPENNESS

*
*

*

should get oﬀ its lawn.”
“Eh?” said the air in Albus’s voice, as if even he could be shocked.
And then Harry Potter’s head appeared, suspended next to the air
beside the toilet, his face was cold and alert, the too-adult Harry she’d
seen sometimes, eyes darting back and forth and around.
“What’s going on—” the boy began.
Albus, now visible once more along with her and Fawkes, was moving forward in an instant, his left hand reached forward and plucked a
hair from Harry’s head (producing a startled yelp from the boy), Minerva accepted the hair in her own hand, and a moment later Albus swept
up the mostly-invisible boy in his arms and there was a ﬂash of red-golden
ﬁre.
And Harry Potter was safe.
Minerva took a few steps forward, leaned against the wall where Albus and Harry had been, trying to recover her poise.
She’d... lost some habits, in the ten years since the Order of the
Phoenix had disbanded.
Beside her, Severus shimmered into visibility. His right hand was already drawing forth the ﬂask from his robes, his left hand already stretching forth in demand. She gave him Harry’s hair, and a moment later,
it dropped into the ﬂask of unﬁnished Polyjuice, which at once began
ﬁzzing and bubbling as it settled into the potency that would enable
Severus to act his part as bait.
“That was unexpected,” the Potions Master said slowly. “Why did
our Headmaster not retrieve Mr. Potter earlier, I wonder, if he was going
so far as to twist Time? There should have been nothing preventing him
from doing so... indeed, your Patronus should have found Mr. Potter
already safe...”
She hadn’t thought of that, a diﬀerent realization having jumped to
the forefront of her mind. It wasn’t nearly as horrifying as Bellatrix
Black having escaped from Azkaban, but still—
“Harry has an invisibility cloak?” she said.
The Potions Master did not answer; he was shrinking.

**
*
*

965 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-ONE

*
*

*

Tick-snick, drip-blip, ding-ring-ting—
It still annoyed her, though it faded past attention after a while; and
when and if she became Headmistress, she intended to Silence the whole
lot. Which Head of Hogwarts, she wondered, had ﬁrst been so inconsiderate as to create a device that made noise, to pass on to their successors?
She was sitting in the Headmaster’s oﬃce with a quickly Transﬁgured
desk of her own, doing some of the hundred little pieces of necessary
paperwork that kept Hogwarts from grinding to a halt; she could lose
herself in it easily, and it prevented her from thinking about other things.
Albus had once remarked, sounding rather wry, that Hogwarts seemed
to run even more smoothly when there was an outside crisis for her to
avoid thinking about...
...ten years ago, that was the last time Albus had said that.
There was the chime that indicated an approaching visitor.
Minerva kept reading her current parchment.
The door slammed open, revealing Severus Snape, who took three
steps inward and demanded without the slightest pause, “Any word from
Mad-Eye?”
Albus was already rising from his chair, even as she tucked away her
parchments and dispelled the desk. “Moody’s Patronus is reporting to
the me in Azkaban,” Albus said. “His Eye saw nothing; and if the Eye
of Vance does not see a thing, then that thing does not exist. Yourself?”
“No one has tried to forcibly take my blood,” Severus said. He gave
a quick grimace of a smile. “Except the Defense Professor.”
“What?” said Minerva.
“He saw me for an impostor before I could even open my lips, and
quite reasonably attacked me on the spot, demanding to know the whereabouts of Mr. Potter.” Another grimace of a smile. “Shouting that I was
Severus Snape did not seem to reassure him, for some reason. I do believe
that man would kill me for a Sickle and give back ﬁve Knuts change. I
had to stun our good Professor Quirrell, which was not easy, and then he
reacted poorly to the hex. ‘Harry Potter’, naturally alarmed, ran out and
told the owner, and the Defense Professor was taken to St. Mungo’s—”

*

966 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XI:
SECRECY AND OPENNESS

*
*

*

“St. Mungo’s?”
“—which said he had probably been overworking himself for weeks
before he collapsed, such was his state of exhaustion. Your precious
Defense Professor is ﬁne, Minerva, the stunner may have helped him by
forcing him to take a few days oﬀ. Afterward I declined the oﬀer of a
Floo to Hogwarts, and went back to Diagon Alley and wandered; but
no one seems to have wanted Mr. Potter’s blood today.”
“Our Defense Professor is in the best of hands, I am sure,” said Albus.
“Greater matters command our attention, Minerva.”
It took considerable eﬀort for her to wrench her attention back, but
she sat back down, and Severus gestured up a chair for himself as well,
and the three of them drew together to begin their council.
She felt like a Polyjuiced impostor, sitting with those two. War was
not her art, nor plotting. She had to strain to keep one step ahead of the
Weasley twins, and sometimes she failed at that. She was sitting here,
ultimately, only because she had heard the prophecy...
“We are faced,” the Headmaster spoke ﬁrst, “with a rather alarming
mystery. I can think of only two wizards who might have engineered
this escape.”
Minerva drew in her breath sharply. “There is a chance it is not YouKnow-Who?”
“I’m afraid so,” said the Headmaster.
She glanced to her side and saw that Severus looked as puzzled as
herself. Afraid the Dark Lord was not rising again? She would have
given almost anything for that to be true.
“So,” Albus said heavily. “Our ﬁrst suspect is Voldemort, risen again
and seeking to resurrect himself. I have studied many books I wish I had
not read, seeking his every possible avenue of return, and I have found
only three. His strongest road to life is the Philosopher’s Stone, which
Flamel assures me that not even Voldemort could create on his own; by
that road he would rise greater and more terrible than ever before. I
would not have thought Voldemort able to resist the temptation of the
Stone, still less because such an obvious trap is a challenge to his wit. But
his second avenue is nearly as strong: The ﬂesh of his servant, willingly
given; the blood of his foe, forcibly taken; and the bone of his ancestor,
*

967 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-ONE

*
*

*

unknowingly bequeathed. Voldemort is a perfectionist—” Albus glanced
at Severus, who nodded agreement, “—and he would certainly seek the
most powerful combination: the ﬂesh of Bellatrix Black, the blood of
Harry Potter, and the bone of his father. Voldemort’s ﬁnal avenue is
to seduce a victim and drain the life from them over a long period; in
which case Voldemort would be weak compared to his former power.
His motive to spirit away Bellatrix is clear. And if he is keeping her in
reserve, to use only in case he cannot attain the Stone, that would explain
why no kidnap attempt was made on Harry this day.”
Minerva glanced again at Severus, saw him listening attentively but
without surprise.
“What is not clear,” the Headmaster continued, “is how Voldemort
could have engineered this escape. A death doll was left in Bellatrix’s
place, her escape was meant to be undetected; and even though that went
wrong, the Dementors could not ﬁnd her after their ﬁrst warning. Azkaban has stood impenetrable for centuries, and I cannot imagine any
means by which Voldemort could have accomplished this.”
“That may mean little,” Severus said, expressionless. “For the Dark
Lord to do what we cannot imagine requires only that he has a better
imagination.”
Albus nodded grimly. “Unfortunately there is now another wizard
who laughs at impossibilities. A wizard who, not long ago, developed a
new and powerful Charm which could have blinded the Dementors to
Bellatrix Black’s escape. And he is implicated for other reasons, as well.”
Minerva’s heart was skipping beats, she didn’t know how, or why,
but a terrible apprehension was dawning on her as to who—
“Who would that be?” said Severus, sounding puzzled.
Albus leaned back and said the fatal words, even as she had feared
them: “Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres.”
“Potter?” demanded the Potions Master, as much shock in that
usually-silken voice as she had ever heard from him. “Headmaster, is
this one of your jokes? He is in his ﬁrst year at Hogwarts! A temper
tantrum and a few childish pranks with an invisibility cloak does not
make him—”
“It is no joke,” said Minerva, her voice barely above a whis*

968 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XI:
SECRECY AND OPENNESS

*
*

*

per. “Harry is already making original discoveries in Transﬁguration,
Severus. Though I did not know he was researching Charms as well.”
“Harry is no ordinary ﬁrst-year,” the Headmaster said solemnly. “He
is marked as the Dark Lord’s equal, and he has power the Dark Lord
knows not.”
Severus was looking at her, and you would have needed to know
him well to recognize that his glance was pleading. “Am I to take this
seriously?”
Minerva simply nodded.
“Does anyone else know of this... new and powerful Charm?” Severus
demanded.
The Headmaster glanced at her apologetically—
Somehow she knew, she knew before he even said it, and she wanted
to scream at the top of her lungs.
—and said, “Quirinus Quirrell.”
“Why,” she said, in a voice that should have melted half the devices in
the oﬃce, “did Mr. Potter even tell our Defense Professor about his brilliant
new Charm for breaking out of prisons—”
The Headmaster passed a weary wrinkled hand across his equally
wrinkled forehead. “Quirinus just happened to be there, Minerva. Even
I saw no harm in it at the time.” The Headmaster hesitated. “And Harry
said his Charm was too dangerous to be explained to either of us; and
when I asked him again, this day, he insisted he had still not explained
it to Quirinus, nor had he ever dropped his Occlumency barriers in the
Defense Professor’s presence—”
“Mr. Potter is an Occlumens? You gave him an invisibility cloak and
he is immune to Veritaserum and he is friends with the Weasley twins?
Albus, do you have any idea what you have unleashed upon this school?”
Her voice was nearly shrieking, now. “By his seventh year there won’t
be anything left of Hogwarts but a smoking hole in the ground!”
Albus leaned back in his great cushioned chair, and said, smiling,
“Don’t forget the Time-Turner.”
She did scream then, but quietly.
Severus drawled, “Should I teach him to brew Polyjuice, Headmaster? I ask only for the sake of completeness, in case you are not satisﬁed
*

969 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-ONE

*
*

*

with the magnitude of your pet disaster.”
“Perhaps next year,” said Albus. “My dearest friends, the question
before us is whether Harry Potter has spirited Bellatrix Black out of
Azkaban, which is more than youthful high spirits even by my tolerant
standards.”
“Excuse me, Headmaster,” Severus said with one of the dryer smiles
she had ever seen him deliver to Albus, “but I will register my opinion
that the answer is no. This is the Dark Lord’s work, pure and simple.”
“Then why,” Albus said, and now there was no humor at all in his
voice, “when I planned to retrieve Harry immediately after his arrival
in Diagon Alley, did I ﬁnd that this would result in paradox?”
Minerva sank further back into her chair, dropped her left elbow
onto the hard uncushioned armrest, leaned her head into her hand, and
shut her eyes in despair.
There was a narrowly circulated proverb to the eﬀect that only one
Auror in thirty was qualiﬁed to investigate cases involving Time-Turners;
and that of those few, the half who weren’t already insane, soon would
be.
“So you suspect,” Severus’s voice was saying, “that Harry went from
Diagon Alley to Azkaban, then looped back to Diagon Alley afterward
to be picked up by us—”
“Precisely,” said Albus’s voice. “Though it is also possible that Voldemort or his servants watched to make sure Harry did arrive in Diagon
Alley, before they began their attempt on Azkaban. And that they had
someone with a Time-Turner who would send back the message of their
success, to trigger the abduction. Indeed, it was my suspicion of this
possibility that caused me to dispatch you and Minerva on your own
mission, before I myself went to Azkaban. I thought then that their
breakout would fail, but if retrieving Harry Potter meant observing the
fact of their eventual failure, then I myself could not have gone to Azkaban after I had interacted with him, for Azkaban’s future cannot touch
its past. When, in Azkaban, I received no report from you or Minerva,
nor from Flitwick whom I told to try contacting you, I knew that your
interaction with Harry Potter had been an interaction with Azkaban’s
future, meaning that someone was sending messages through Time—”
*

970 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XI:
SECRECY AND OPENNESS

*
*

*

Then Albus’s voice stopped.
“But Headmaster,” said Severus, “you came back from Azkaban’s future and interacted with us...”
The Potions Master’s voice trailed oﬀ.
“But Severus, if I had received reports from you and Minerva of
Harry’s safety, I would not, in the ﬁrst place, have gone backward in
time to—”
“Headmaster, I think we must draw diagrams for this.”
“I agree, Severus.”
There was the sound of parchment being spread on a table, and then
quills scratching, and more arguing.
Minerva sat in her chair, head resting in her hand, eyes shut.
There was a story she’d once heard about a criminal who had possessed a Time-Turner which the Department of Mysteries had sealed to
him, in a case of extremely bad judgment as to who needed one; and there
had been an Auror assigned to track down this unknown time-criminal,
who had also been given a Time-Turner; and the story ended with both
of them in St. Mungo’s ward for Total Unrecoverable Nutcases.
Minerva sat there with her eyes shut, trying not to listen, trying not
to think about it, and trying not to go insane.
After awhile, when the argument seemed to have wound down, she
said aloud, “Mr. Potter’s Time-Turner is restricted to the hours of nine
pm through midnight. Was the shell tampered with, Albus?”
“Not to my most discerning Charms,” said Albus. “But the shells
are new things; and to defeat the Unspeakables’ precautions and leave
no trace of the defeat... might not be impossible.”
She opened her eyes, and saw Severus and the Headmaster staring
intently at a parchment covered with tangled squiggles that would have
no doubt driven her mad to comprehend.
“Have you come to any conclusions?” Minerva said. “And please
don’t tell me how you arrived at them.”
Severus and the Headmaster looked at each other, then turned to
look at her.
“We have concluded,” the Headmaster said gravely, “that either
Harry was involved or he was not; that either Voldemort has access to a
*

971

*

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-ONE

*
*

*

Time-Turner or he does not; and that regardless of what could have happened within Azkaban, nobody would have visited the Little Hangleton
graveyard during the period Moody has already watched over it within
my own past.”
“In short,” Severus drawled, “we know nothing, dear Minerva;
though it seems at least likely that another Time-Turner was involved,
somehow. My own suspicion is that Potter has been bribed, tricked, or
threatened into conveying messages backward in time, perhaps even regarding this very prison break. I shall not make the obvious suggestion as
to who is pulling his strings. But I suggest that at nine o’ clock tonight,
we test whether Potter is able to travel the full six hours backward to
three o’ clock, to see if he has yet used his Time-Turner.”
“That seems wise to do in any case,” said Dumbledore. “See that
done, Minerva, and tell Harry to stop in my oﬃce at his convenience,
afterward.”
“But you still suspect Harry of direct involvement in the prison break
itself?” Minerva said.
“Possible but unlikely,” said Severus, at the same time Albus said,
“Yes.”
Minerva pinched the bridge of her nose, took a deep breath, let it
out. “Albus, Severus, what possible reason has Mr. Potter to do such a
thing!”
“None that I can think of,” said Albus, “but it remains that Harry’s
magics alone, of all the means known to me, might have—”
“Hold,” said Severus. All expression vanished from his face. “A
thought occurs to me, I must check—” The Potions Master seized a pinch
of Floo powder, strode across the room toward the ﬁreplace—Albus
hastily waved his wand to light it—and then in a ﬂare of green ﬂame,
and the words “Slytherin Head of House oﬃce”, Severus was gone.
She and Albus looked at each other and both shrugged; and then
Albus turned back to studying the parchment.
It was only a few minutes later that Severus spun back out of the
Floo, brushing traces of ash from himself.
“Well,” said the Potions Master. Again the expressionless face. “I am
afraid that Mr. Potter does have a motive.”
*

972 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XI:
SECRECY AND OPENNESS

*
*

*

“Speak!” said Albus.
“I found Lesath Lestrange in the Slytherin common room, studying,”
Severus said. “He was not reluctant to meet my eyes. And it seems that
Mr. Lestrange did not like to think of his parents in Azkaban, in the cold
and the darkness, with the Dementors sucking away their life, hurting
every second of every day, and he told Mr. Potter so in as many words,
and begged him to get them out. Since, you see, Mr. Lestrange had heard
that the Boy-Who-Lived could do anything.”
She and Albus exchanged glances.
“Severus,” Minerva said, “surely... even Harry... has more common
sense than that...”
Her voice trailed oﬀ.
“Mr. Potter thinks he is God,” Severus said without expression, “and
Lesath Lestrange fell to his knees before him in a heartfelt cry of prayer.”
Minerva stared at Severus, feeling sick to her stomach. She had studied Muggle religion—it was the most common reason for needing to
Memory-Charm the parents of Muggleborns—and she knew enough to
understand what Severus had just said.
“In any case,” said the Potions Master. “I looked within Mr. Lestrange to see if he knew anything of his mother’s escape. He has heard
nothing. But the instant he learns, he will conclude that the person responsible was Harry Potter.”
“I see...” Albus said slowly. “Thank you, Severus. That is good
news.”
“Good news?” Minerva burst out.
Albus looked at her, his face as expressionless as Severus’s, now; and
she remembered, with a shock, that Albus’s own—“It is the best reason
I can possibly imagine for removing Bellatrix from Azkaban,” Albus
said quietly. “And if it is not Harry, let us recall, then it is certainly
Voldemort himself making his ﬁrst moves. But let us not be hasty in
judgment while there is much we do not yet know, but soon will.”
Albus once more stood up from behind his desk, strode to the ﬁreplace still alight, cast in another pinch of green powder, and stuck his
head into the ﬂames. “Department of Magical Law Enforcement,” he
said, “Director’s oﬃce.”
*

973 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-ONE

*
*

*

After a moment, the voice of Madam Bones came through clear and
sharp, “What is it, Albus? I am somewhat busy.”
“Amelia,” said Albus, “I beg of you to share any discoveries you have
made concerning this matter.”
There was a pause. “Oh,” said the cold voice of Madam Bones from
the blazing ﬁre, “and is that a two-way road then, Albus?”
“It may be,” the old wizard said calmly.
“If any Auror dies of your reticence, old meddler, I will hold you
responsible in full measure.”
“I understand, Amelia,” Albus said, “but I have no wish to spark
needless alarm and incredulity—”
“Bellatrix Black has escaped from Azkaban! What alarm or incredulity do you think I will call needless, in the face of that?”
“I may call on you to remember those words,” said the old wizard
into the green ﬂames. “For if I learn that my fears are not needless, I
will tell you. Now, Amelia, I beg you, if you have learned anything
whatsoever upon this matter, please share it.”
There was another pause, and then Madam Bones’s voice said, “I have
information which I learned four hours into the future, Albus. Do you
still want it?”
Albus paused—
(weighing, Minerva knew, the possibility that he might want to go
back more than two hours from this instant; for you couldn’t send information further back in time than six hours, not through any chain of
Time-Turners)
—and ﬁnally said, “Yes, please.”
“We had a lucky break,” said Madam Bones’s voice, “one of the Aurors who witnessed the escape was a Muggleborn, and she told us that
the Flying-Fire spell, as we were calling it, might be no spell at all, but a
Muggle artifact.”
Like a punch in the stomach, that was how it felt, and the sickness
in Minerva’s belly redoubled. Anyone who’d watched a Chaos Legion
battle knew whose hand that showed...
Madam Bones’s voice continued. “We brought in Arthur Weasley
from Misuse of Muggle Artifacts—he knows more about Muggle artifacts
*

974 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XI:
SECRECY AND OPENNESS

*
*

*

than any wizard alive—and gave him the descriptions from the Aurors
on the scene, and he cracked it. It was a Muggle artifact called a rocker,
and they call it that because you’d have to be oﬀ your rocker to ride
one. Just six years ago one of their rockers blew up, killed hundreds of
Muggles in a ﬂash and almost set ﬁre to the Moon. Weasley says that
rockers use a special kind of science called opposite reaction, so the plan
is to develop a jinx which will prevent that science from working around
Azkaban.”
“Thank you, Amelia,” Albus said gravely. “Is that everything?”
“I’ll check if we have anything from six hours forward,” said the voice
of Madam Bones, “if so they wouldn’t have told me, but I’ll have them
tell you. Do you have anything you want to tell me, Albus? Which of
those two possibilities is it looking like?”
“Not yet, Amelia,” Albus said, “but I may have word for you soon.”
He straightened up from the ﬁre, then, which faded back to ordinary
yellow ﬂames. Every minute of the old wizard’s years, every natural
second since his birth and every second which Time-Turning had added,
all of that plus a few extra decades for stress, was visible on his lined face.
“Severus?” the old wizard said. “What was it actually?”
“A rocket,” said the half-blood Potions Master, who had grown up in
the Muggle town of Spinner’s End. “One of the most impressive Muggle
technologies.”
“How likely is Harry to know such arts?” said Minerva.
Severus drawled, “Oh, a boy like Mr. Potter knows all about rockets;
that, dear Minerva, is a certainty. You must remember that things are
done diﬀerently in the Muggle world.” Severus frowned. “But rockets
are dangerous, and expensive...”
“Harry has stolen and hidden an unknown amount of money from
his Gringotts vault, perhaps thousands of Galleons,” said the Headmaster, and then, to their twin stares, “That was not in my plan, but I
made the mistake of sending the Defense Professor to supervise Harry’s
withdrawal of ﬁve Galleons for Christmas presents...” The Headmaster
shrugged. “Yes, I agree, sheer folly in retrospect, let us continue.”
Minerva quietly thudded her head a few times against the headrest
of her chair.
*

975 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-ONE

*
*

*

“Nonetheless, Headmaster,” Severus said. “Just because the Death
Eaters never used Muggle artifacts in the ﬁrst war, that does not mean
he is ignorant. Rockets fell on Britain as weapons, in the Muggle side
of Grindelwald’s war. If he spent the summers of those years in a Muggle orphanage, as you told us, Headmaster... then he, too, has heard of
rockets. And if he has been listening to reports of Mr. Potter and his
mock battles using Muggle artifacts, he would certainly learn his enemy’s
strengths and try to redouble them himself. That is just how he thinks;
any power he sees he will try to take for his own.”
The old wizard was standing stock still, utterly motionless, even the
hairs of his beard frozen in place like solid wires; and the thought came
to Minerva, as frightening as any thought she’d ever had, that Albus
Dumbledore was rooted to the spot in horror.
“Severus,” Albus Dumbledore said, and his voice almost cracked, “do
you realize what you are saying? If Harry Potter and Voldemort ﬁght
their war with Muggle weapons there will be nothing left of the world
but ﬁre!”
“What?” said Minerva. She had heard of guns, of course, but they
weren’t that dangerous to an experienced witch—
Severus spoke as though she weren’t in the room. “Then perhaps,
Headmaster, he is sending a deliberate warning to Harry Potter of exactly that; saying that any attack with Muggle weapons will be met with
retaliation in kind. Command Mr. Potter to cease his use of Muggle
technology in his battles; that will show him the message is received...
and not give him any more ideas.” Severus frowned. “Though, come to
think of it, Mr. Malfoy—and of course Miss Granger—well, on second
thought a blanket prohibition on technology seems wiser—”
The old wizard pressed both his hands to his forehead, and from his
lips came an unsteady voice, “I begin to hope that it is Harry behind this
escape... oh, Merlin defend us all, what have I done, what have I done,
what will become of the world?”
Severus shrugged. “From the rumors I have heard, Headmaster,
Muggle weapons are only slightly worse than the more... recondite aspects of wizardry—”
“Worse?” gasped Minerva, and then shut her mouth as though by
*

976 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XI:
SECRECY AND OPENNESS

*
*

*

force.
“Worse than any peril I know,” said Albus. “But probably not worse
than whatever erased Atlantis from Time.”
Minerva stared at him, feeling the sweat break out all along her spine.
Severus continued, still addressing Albus. “All the Death Eaters save
Bellatrix would have betrayed him, all his supporters turned against him,
all the powers of the world converged to destroy him, if he had been
reckless with any truly dangerous potency. Is this so diﬀerent, then?”
Some motion, some color, had returned to the old wizard’s face.
“Perhaps not...”
“And in any case,” Severus said with a slightly condescending smile,
“Muggle weapons are not so easy to obtain, not for a thousand Galleons
or a thousand thousand.”
Doesn’t Harry just Transﬁgure the devices he uses in his battles? thought
Minerva, but before she could open her mouth to ask—
The ﬁreplace erupted in green ﬂames, then, and the face of Pius
Thicknesse, Madam Bones’s assistant, appeared therein. “Chief Warlock?” said Thicknesse. “I have a report for you, transmitted from—”
Thicknesse’s eyes ﬂickered over Minerva and Severus, “six minutes ago.”
“Six hours ahead, you mean,” said Albus. “These two are meant to
hear it; deliver your report.”
“We know how it was done,” said Thicknesse. “In Bellatrix Black’s
cell, hidden in one corner, was a potions vial; and testing the traces of
remaining ﬂuid shows that it was an Animagus potion.”
There was a long pause.
“I see...” Albus said heavily.
“Pardon me?” said Minerva. She didn’t.
Thicknesse’s head turned toward her. “Animagi, Madam McGonagall, in their Animagus forms, are of less interest to Dementors. All
prisoners are tested before their arrival at Azkaban; and if they are Animagi, their Animagus form is destroyed. But we had not considered
that someone protected by a Patronus Charm while taking the potion
and performing the meditation, might be able to become an Animagus
after they went to Azkaban—”
“I understood,” Severus said, having by now put on his customary
*

977 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-ONE

*
*

*

sneer, “that the Animagus meditation required considerable time.”
“Well, Mr. Snape,” Thicknesse barked, “records show that Bellatrix
Black was an Animagus before she was sentenced to Azkaban and her
form destroyed; so maybe her second meditation didn’t take as much
time as her ﬁrst!”
“I would not have thought it possible for any prisoner of Azkaban to
do such a thing...” Albus said. “But Bellatrix Black was a most powerful
sorceress before her incarceration, and she might have done it if any
witch could. Can Azkaban be secured against this method?”
“Yes,” said the conﬁdent head of Pius Thicknesse. “Our expert says
that it is nigh-unimaginable that an Animagus meditation could be performed in less than three hours, regardless of experience. All visits to
prisoners allowed to receive them will be limited to two hours henceforth, and the Dementors will inform us if any Patronus Charm is maintained in the prison areas for longer than that.”
Albus looked unhappy at that, but nodded. “I see. There will be no
further attempts of that sort, of course, but do not relax your vigilance.
And when Amelia has been told all this, tell her that I have information
for her.”
The head of Pius Thicknesse vanished without another word.
“No further attempts...?” said Minerva.
“Because, dear Minerva,” Severus drawled, having not quite taken oﬀ
his habitual sneer, “if the Dark Lord had planned to free any of his other
servants from Azkaban, he would not have left behind the vial of potion
to tell us how it was done.” Severus frowned. “I confess... even so I do
not see why that vial was left there.”
“It is some kind of message...” Albus said slowly. “And I cannot see
what it means, not at all...” He drummed his ﬁngers on his desk.
For a long minute or three, the old wizard stared oﬀ into nothingness, frowning; while Severus also sat in silence.
Then Albus shook his head in dismay, and said, “Severus, do you
comprehend this?”
“No,” said the Potions Master, and with a sardonic smile, “which is
probably all the better for us; whatever we are intended to conclude from
it, that part of his plan has misﬁred.”
*

978 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XI:
SECRECY AND OPENNESS

*
*

*

“You are certain, now, that it is You-Know... that it is Voldemort?”
said Minerva. “It could not be that some other Death Eater conceived
this clever notion?”
“And they knew about rockets, too?” Severus said dryly. “I don’t
believe the other Death Eaters were so fond of Muggle Studies. It is he.”
“Aye, it is he,” Albus said. “Azkaban has endured impenetrable for
ages, only to fall to an ordinary Animagus potion. It is too clever and
too impossible, which was ever Voldemort’s signature since the days he
was known as Tom Riddle. Anyone who wished to forge that signature
must needs be as cunning as Voldemort himself to do so. And there is
no one else in the world who would accidentally overestimate my wit,
and leave me a message I cannot understand at all.”
“Unless he has gauged you exactly,” Severus said tonelessly, “in which
case all that is just what he intended you to think.”
Albus sighed. “Indeed. But even if he has tricked me perfectly, we
may at least rely on the conclusion that it was not Harry Potter.”
It should have come as a relief, and yet Minerva felt the chill spreading
through her spine and her veins, her lungs and her bones.
She remembered conversations like this.
She remembered conversations like this from ten years ago, from a
time when blood had run through Britain in wide rivers, when wizards
and witches she had once taught in class had been slaughtered by the
hundreds, she remembered burning homes and screaming children and
ﬂashes of green light—
“What will you tell Madam Bones?” she whispered.
Albus stood from his desk and paced to the center of the room, his
hand lightly touching the devices, here an instrument of light, there an
instrument of sound; he adjusted his glasses with one hand, used the
other to center the long silver beard against his robes, and then ﬁnally
that ancient wizard turned back and faced them.
“I will tell her what little I know of the Dark Art called horcrux,
by which a soul is deprived of death,” said Albus Dumbledore, in a soft
voice that seemed to ﬁll the whole room, “and I will tell her what may
be done with the ﬂesh of the servant.”
“I will tell her that I am reconstituting the Order of the Phoenix.”
*

979 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-ONE

*
*

*

“I will tell her that Voldemort has returned.”
“And that the Second Wizarding War is begun.”

**
*
Some hours later...
The antique old clock upon the wall of the Deputy Headmistress’s
oﬃce had golden hands, and silver numerals to make the clock-face; it
ticked and jerked soundlessly through its motions, for there was a Quieting enchantment on it.
The golden hour hand approached the silver numeral of nine, the
golden minute hand did the same, the two linked components of Time
nearing each other, soon to be in the same place and never to collide.
It was 8:43pm, and the time approached when Harry’s Time-Turner
would open, to be tested in the one way that no imaginable spell could
fool, unless that spell could bypass the laws of Time itself. No body or
soul, no knowledge or substance, could stretch an extra seven hours in
a single day. She would make up a message on the spot, and tell Harry
to take that message back six hours to Professor Flitwick at 3pm, and she
would ask Professor Flitwick if he had received it in that hour.
And Professor Flitwick would tell her that he had indeed received it
at 3pm.
And she would tell Severus and Albus to have a little more faith in
Harry next time.
Professor McGonagall cast the Patronus Charm, and told her shining
cat, “Go to Mr. Potter, and tell him this: Mr. Potter, please come to my
oﬃce as soon as you hear this, without doing anything else along the
way.”

*

980 *

CHAPTER

SIXT Y-TWO

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART XII
,
inerva gazed up at the clock, the golden hands and silver numerals, the jerking motion. Muggles had invented that, and until
they had, wizards had not bothered keeping time. Bells, timed by a
sanded hourglass, had served Hogwarts for its classes when it was built.
It was one of the things that blood purists wished not to be true, and
therefore Minerva knew it.
She had received an Outstanding on her Muggle Studies n.e.w.t.,
which now seemed to her a mark of shame, considering how little she
knew. Her younger self had realized, even then, that the class was a
sham, taught by a pureblood, supposedly because Muggleborns could
not appreciate what wizardborns needed to be told, and actually because
the Board of Governors did not approve of Muggles at all. But when she
was seventeen the Outstanding grade had been the main thing that mattered to her, she was saddened to remember...
If Harry Potter and Voldemort ﬁght their war with Muggle weapons
there will be nothing left of the world but ﬁre!
She couldn’t imagine it, and the reason she couldn’t imagine it was
that she couldn’t imagine Harry ﬁghting You-Know-Who.
She had encountered the Dark Lord four times and survived each
one, three times with Albus to shield her and once with Moody at her
side. She remembered the damaged, snakelike face, the faint green scales
scattered over the skin, the glowing red eyes, the voice that laughed in
a high-pitched hiss and promised nothing but cruelty and torment: the
monster pure and complete.

M

*

981 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-TWO

*
*

*

And Harry Potter was easy to picture in her mind, the bright expression on the face of a young boy who wavered between taking the
ludicrous seriously and taking the serious ludicrously.
And to think of the two of them facing oﬀ at wandpoint was too
painful to be imagined.
They had no right, no right at all to set this on an eleven-year-old boy.
She knew what the Headmaster had decided for him this day, for she had
been told to make the arrangements; and if it had been her at the same
age she would have raged and screamed and cried and been inconsolable
for weeks, and...
He is no ordinary ﬁrst-year, Albus had said. He is marked as the Dark
Lord’s equal, and he has power the Dark Lord knows not.
The terrible hollow voice booming from Sybill Trelawney’s throat,
the true and original prophecy, echoed once more through her mind.
She had a feeling it didn’t mean what the Headmaster thought it did,
but there was no way to put the diﬀerence into words.
And even so it still seemed true, that if there were any eleven-year-old
within the Earth entire who could bear this burden, that boy approached
her oﬃce now. And if she said anything at all like ‘poor Harry’ to his
face... well, he wouldn’t like it.
So now I’ve got to ﬁnd some way to kill an immortal Dark Wizard,
Harry had said on the day he had ﬁrst learned. I really wish you had told
me that before I started shopping...
She’d been Head of House Gryﬃndor for long enough, she’d
watched enough friends die, to know that there were some people you
couldn’t save from becoming heroes.
There came a knock at the door, and Professor McGonagall said,
“Enter.”
When Harry entered, his face had the same cold, alert look she’d seen
in Mary’s Place; and she wondered for an instant if he’d been wearing
that same mask, that same self, this whole day.
The young boy seated himself on the chair before her desk, and said,
“So is it time for me to be told what’s going on?” Neutral the words, not
the sharpness that should have gone with the expression.
Professor McGonagall’s eyes rose in surprise before she could stop
*

982 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XII

*
*

*

them, and she said, “The Headmaster told you nothing, Mr. Potter?”
The boy shook his head. “Only that he’d received a warning that I
might be in danger, but I was safe now.”
Minerva was having trouble meeting his gaze. How could they do
this to him, how could they lay this upon an eleven-year-old boy, this
war, this destiny, this prophecy... and they didn’t even trust him...
She forced herself to look at Harry directly, and saw that his green
eyes were calm as they rested on her.
“Professor McGonagall?” the boy said quietly.
“Mr. Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, “I’m afraid it is not my
place to explain, but if after this the Headmaster still does not tell you
anything, you may come back to me and I will go yell at him for you.”
The boy’s eyes widened, something of the real Harry showing
through the crack before the cool mask was set back in place.
“In any case,” Professor McGonagall said briskly. “I’m sorry for the
inconvenience, Mr. Potter, but I need to ask you to use your Time-Turner
to go back six hours to three o’clock, and give the following message to
Professor Flitwick: Silver on the tree. Ask the Professor to note down
the time at which you gave him that message. Afterward the Headmaster
wishes to meet with you at your convenience.”
There was a pause.
Then the boy said, “I am suspected of misusing my Time-Turner,
then?”
“Not by me!” Professor McGonagall said hastily. “I am sorry for the
inconvenience, Mr. Potter.”
There was another pause, and then the young boy shrugged. “It’ll
play hob with my sleep schedule but I suppose it can’t be helped. Please
let the house elves know that if I ask for an early breakfast at, say, three
A.M. tomorrow morning, I’m to receive it.”
“Of course, Mr. Potter,” she said. “Thank you for understanding.”
The boy rose up from his chair and gave her a formal nod, then
slipped out the door with his hand already going under his shirt to
where his Time-Turner waited; and she almost called out Harry! only
she wouldn’t have known what to say after.
Instead she waited, her eyes on the clock.
*

983 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-TWO

*
*

*

How long did she need to wait for Harry Potter to go back in time?
She didn’t need to wait at all, actually; if he had done it, then it had
already happened...
Minerva knew, then, that she was delaying because she was nervous,
and the realization saddened her. Mischief, yes, unspeakable unthinkable mischief with all the prudence and foresight of a falling rock—she
didn’t know how the boy had tricked the Hat into not Sorting him to
Gryﬃndor where he obviously belonged—but nothing dark or harmful, not ever. Beneath that mischief his goodness ran as deep and as true
as the Weasley twins’, though not even the Cruciatus Curse could have
gotten her to say that out loud.
“Expecto Patronum,” she said, and then, “Go to Professor Flitwick,
and bear back his reply after you ask him this: ‘Did Mr. Potter give you
a message from me, what was that message, and when did you receive
it?’”

**
*
One hour earlier, having used the last remaining spin of his Time-Turner
after putting on the Cloak of Invisibility, Harry tucked the hourglass
back into his shirt.
And he set out toward the Slytherin dungeons, striding as quickly
as his invisible legs could manage, though not running. Thankfully the
Deputy Headmistress’s oﬃce was already on a lower ﬂoor of Hogwarts...
A few staircases later, taken two steps but not three steps at once,
Harry stopped at a corridor around whose ﬁnal bend lay the entrance
to the Slytherin dorms.
Harry took a piece of parchment (not paper) out of his pouch, took a
Quotes Quill (not pen) out of his pouch, and told the quill, “Write these
letters exactly as I say them: Z-P-G-B-S-Y, space, F-V-Y-I-R-E-B-A-G-UR-G-E-R-R.”
There were two kinds of codes in cryptography, codes that stopped
your little brother from reading your message and codes that stopped
major governments from reading your message, and this was the ﬁrst
kind of code, but it was better than nothing. In theory, no one should
*

984 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XII

*
*

*

read it anyway; but even if they did, they wouldn’t remember anything
interesting unless they did cryptography ﬁrst.
Harry then put that parchment in a parchment envelope, and with
his wand melted a little green wax to seal it.
In principle, of course, Harry could’ve done all that hours earlier,
but somehow waiting until after he heard the message from Professor
McGonagall’s own lips seemed less like Messing With Time.
Harry then put that envelope inside another envelope, which already
contained another sheet of paper with other instructions, and ﬁve silver
Sickles.
He closed that envelope (which already had a name written on the
outside), sealed it with more green wax, and pressed a ﬁnal Sickle into
that seal.
Then Harry put that envelope into the very last envelope on which
was written in large letters the name “Merry Tavington”.
And Harry peeked around the bend to where the scowling portrait
that served as the door to the Slytherin dorms waited; and as he did
not wish the portrait to recall not-seeing anyone invisible, Harry used
the Hover Charm to ﬂoat the envelope to the scowling man, and tap it
against him.
The scowling man looked down at the envelope, peering at it through
a monocle, and sighed, and turned around to face toward the inside of
the Slytherin dorms, and called, “Message for Merry Tavington!”
The envelope was then allowed to fall to the ﬂoor.
A few moments later the portrait door opened, and Merry snatched
up the envelope from the ﬂoor.
She would open it up and ﬁnd a Sickle and an envelope addressed to
a fourth-year student named Margaret Bulstrode.
(Slytherins did this sort of thing all the time, and a Sickle deﬁnitely
constituted a rush order.)
Margaret would open her envelope, and ﬁnd ﬁve Sickles along with
an envelope to be dropped oﬀ in an unused classroom...
...after she used her Time-Turner to go back ﬁve hours...
...whereupon she would ﬁnd another ﬁve Sickles waiting for her, if
she got there quickly.
*

985 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-TWO

*
*

*

And an invisible Harry Potter would be waiting in that classroom
from three pm to three-thirty, just in case someone tried the obvious test.
Well, it had been obvious to Professor Quirrell, anyway.
It had also been obvious to Professor Quirrell that (a) Margaret Bulstrode had a Time-Turner and (b) she wasn’t very strict about how she
used it, e.g. sharing really good pieces of gossip “before” anyone else had
heard.
Some of the tension leaked oﬀ Harry as he strode away from the
portrait door, still invisible. Somehow his mind had still managed to
worry about the plan, even knowing that it had already succeeded. Now
there remained only the confrontation with Dumbledore, and then he
was done for the day... he’d go to the Headmaster’s gargoyles at 9pm, since
doing it at 8pm would seem more suspicious. This way he could claim
that he’d just misunderstood what Professor McGonagall had meant by
“afterward”...
The obscure pain clutched at Harry’s heart again as he thought of
Professor McGonagall.
So Harry retreated a little further into his dark side, which had worn
the calm expression and kept the fatigue oﬀ his face, and kept walking.
There would come a reckoning, but sometimes you had to borrow
everything you could today, and let the payments come due tomorrow.

**
*
Even Harry’s dark side was feeling the exhaustion by the time the spiraling staircase had delivered him to the great oaken door that was the ﬁnal
gate to Dumbledore’s oﬃce; but since Harry was now legally four hours
past his natural bedtime, it was safe to let some of the fatigue show, the
physical if not the emotional.
The oaken door swung open—
Harry’s eyes had already been focused in the direction of the great
desk, the throne behind it; so it took a moment to register that the throne
was empty, the desk barren but for a single leatherbound volume; and
then Harry shifted his gaze to see the wizard standing among his ﬁddly
*

986 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XII

*
*

*

things, the mysterious unknown devices in their scores. Fawkes and the
Sorting Hat occupied their respective perches, a bright cheerful blaze
crackled in a nook that Harry had not before realized was a ﬁreplace,
and there were the two umbrellas and three red slippers for left feet. All
things in their place and in their customary appearance except the old
wizard himself, standing tall and dressed in robes of the most formal
black. It came as a shock to the eyes, those robes on that person, it was
as if Harry had seen his father wearing a business suit.
Very ancient was the appearance of Albus Dumbledore, and sorrowful.
“Hello, Harry,” said the old wizard.
From within an alternate self maintained like an Occlumency construct, an innocent-Harry who had absolutely no idea what was happening inclined his head coldly, and said, “Headmaster. I expect you’ve
heard back from Deputy Headmistress McGonagall by now, so if it’s
ﬁne by you, I would really like to know what is going on.”
“Yes,” said the old wizard, “it is time, Harry Potter.” The back
straightened, only slightly for the wizard had already been standing
straight; but somehow even that small change made the wizard seem
a foot taller, and stronger if not younger, formidable though not dangerous, his potency gathered about him like a cowl. In a clear voice, then,
he spoke: “This day your war against Voldemort has begun.”
“What?” said the outer Harry who knew nothing, while something
watching from inside thought much the same only with a lot more profanity attached.
“Bellatrix Black has been taken from Azkaban, she has escaped from
a prison inescapable,” the old wizard said. “It is a feat that bears Voldemort’s signature if ever I have seen it; and she, his most faithful servant, is
one of three requisites he must obtain to rise again in a new body. After
ten years the enemy you once defeated has returned, as was foretold.”
Neither part of Harry could think of anything to say to that, at least
not for the few seconds before the old wizard continued.
“It need change little for you, for now,” said the old wizard. “I have
begun reconstituting the Order of the Phoenix that will serve you, I have
alerted the few souls who can and should understand: Amelia Bones,
*

987 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Alastor Moody, Bartemius Crouch, certain others. Of the prophecy—
yes, there is a prophecy—I have not told them, but they know that Voldemort is returned, and they know that you are to play some vital role.
They and I shall ﬁght your war in its lesser beginnings, while you grow
stronger, and perhaps wiser, here at Hogwarts.” The old wizard’s hand
came up, as though beseeching. “So to you, for now, there is but one
change, and I implore you to understand its necessity. Do you recognize
the book on my desk, Harry?”
The inner part of Harry was screaming and banging its head against
imaginary walls, while the outer Harry turned and stared at what proved
to be—
There was a rather long pause.
Then Harry said, “It is a copy of The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R.
Tolkien.”
“You recognized a quote from that book,” said Dumbledore, an intent look in his eyes, “so I assume you remember it well. If I am mistaken, let me be corrected.”
Harry just stared at him.
“It is important to understand,” said Dumbledore, “that this book is
not a realistic depiction of a wizarding war. John Tolkien never fought
Voldemort. Your war will not be like the books you have read. Real life
is not like stories. Do you understand, Harry?”
Harry, rather slowly, nodded yes; and then shook his head no.
“In particular,” said Dumbledore, “there is a certain very foolish
thing that Gandalf does in the ﬁrst book. He makes many mistakes,
does Tolkien’s wizard; but this one error is the most unforgivable. That
mistake is this: When Gandalf ﬁrst suspected, even for a moment, that
Frodo held the One Ring, he should have moved Frodo to Rivendell
at once. He might have been embarrassed, that old wizard, if his suspicions had proven false. He might have found it awkward to so command
Frodo, and Frodo would have been greatly inconvenienced, needing to
set aside many other plans and pastimes. But a little embarrassment, and
awkwardness, and inconvenience, is as nothing compared to the loss of
your whole war, when the nine Nazgul swoop down on the Shire while
you are reading old scrolls in Minas Tirith, and take the Ring at once.
*

988 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XII

*
*

*

And it is not Frodo alone who would have been hurt; all Middle-Earth
would have fallen into slavery. If it had not been only a story, Harry,
they would have lost their war. Do you understand what I am saying?”
“Er...” said Harry, “not exactly...” There was something about Dumbledore when he was like this, which made it hard to stay properly cold;
his dark side had trouble with weird.
“Then I will spell it out,” said the old wizard. His voice was stern, his
eyes were sad. “Frodo should have been moved to Rivendell at once by
Gandalf himself—and Frodo should never have left Rivendell without
guard. There should have been no night of terror in Bree, no Barrowdowns, no Weathertop where Frodo was wounded, they could have lost
their entire war any of those times, for Gandalf’s folly! Do you understand now what I am saying to you, son of Michael and Petunia?”
And the Harry who knew nothing did understand.
And the Harry who knew nothing saw that it was the smart, the
wise, the intelligent and sane, the right thing to do.
And the Harry who knew nothing said just what an innocent Harry
would have said, while the silent watcher screamed in confusion and
agony.
“You’re saying,” Harry said, his voice shaking as the emotions inside
burned through the outer calm, “that I’m not going home to my parents
for Easter.”
“You will see them again,” the old wizard said swiftly. “I will beg
them to come here to be with you, I will extend them every courtesy
during their visits. But you are not going home for Easter, Harry. You
are not going home for the summer. You are no longer taking lunches in
Diagon Alley, even with Professor Quirrell to watch you. Your blood
is the second requisite Voldemort needs to rise as strong as before. So
you are never again leaving the bounds of Hogwarts’s wards without a
vital reason, and a guard strong enough to fend oﬀ any attack for long
enough to get you to safety. “
Water was beginning at the corners of Harry’s eyes. “Is that a request?” said his quavering voice. “Or an order?”
“I’m sorry, Harry,” the old wizard said softly. “Your parents will see
the necessity, I hope; but if not... I am afraid they have no recourse; the
*

989 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-TWO

*
*

*

law, however wrongly, does not recognize them as your guardians. I am
sorry, Harry, and I will understand if you despise me for it, but it must
be done.”
Harry whirled, looked at the door, he couldn’t look at Dumbledore
any more, couldn’t trust his own face.
This is the cost to yourself, said Huﬄepuﬀ within his mind, even as you
imposed costs on others. Will that change your whole view of the matter, the
way Professor Quirrell thinks it will?
Automatically, the mask of the innocent Harry said exactly what it
would have said: “Are my parents in danger? Do they need to be moved
here?”
“No,” said the old wizard’s voice. “I do not think so. The Death
Eaters learned, toward the end of the war, not to attack the Order’s families. And if Voldemort is now acting without his former companions,
he still knows that it is I who make the decisions for now, and he knows
that I would give him nothing for any threat to your family. I have
taught him that I do not give in to blackmail, and so he will not try.”
Harry turned back then, and saw a coldness on the old wizard’s face
to match the shift in his voice, Dumbledore’s blue eyes grown hard as
steel behind the glasses, it didn’t match the person but it matched the
formal black robes.
“Is that everything, then?” said Harry’s trembling voice. Later he
would think about this, later he would think of some cunning countermeasure, later he would ask Professor Quirrell if there was any way to
convince the Headmaster he was mistaken. Right now, maintaining the
mask was taking all of Harry’s attention.
“Voldemort used a Muggle artifact to escape Azkaban,” the old wizard said. “He is watching you and learning from you, Harry Potter.
Soon a man named Arthur Weasley at the Ministry will issue an edict
that all use of Muggle artifacts must cease in the Defense Professor’s battles. In the future, when you have a good idea, keep it closer about
yourself.”
It didn’t seem important by comparison. Harry just nodded, and
said again, “Is that everything?”
There was a pause.
* 990 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XII

*
*

*

“Please,” said the old wizard in a whisper. “I have no right to ask
your forgiveness, Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres, but please, at least
say that you understand why.” There was water in the old wizard’s eyes.
“I understand,” said the voice of the outer Harry who did understand, “I mean... I was sort of thinking about it anyway... wondering
whether I could get you and my parents to let me stay over at Hogwarts
during the summer like the orphans, so I could read the library here, it’s
just more interesting at Hogwarts anyway...”
A choking sound came from Albus Dumbledore’s throat.
Harry turned again toward the door. It wasn’t escape unscathed, but
it was escape.
He took a step forward.
His hand reached to the door-handle.
A piercing cry split the air—
As though in slow motion, as Harry spun, he saw the phoenix already launched through the air and winging toward him.
From the true Harry, the one who knew his own guilt, came a ﬂash
of panic, he hadn’t thought of that, hadn’t anticipated it, he’d prepared
to face Dumbledore but he’d forgotten about Fawkes—
Flap, ﬂap, and ﬂap, three times the phoenix’s wings ﬂapped like the
ﬂaring up and dying down of a ﬁre, duration seemed to pass too slowly as
Fawkes soared over the mysterious devices toward where Harry stood.
And the red-golden bird was hovering in front of him with gentle
wing-sweeps, bobbing in the air like a candle-ﬂame.
“What is it, Fawkes?” said the false Harry in puzzlement, looking the
phoenix in the eyes, as he would if he were innocent. The real Harry,
feeling the same awful sickness inside as when Professor McGonagall
had expressed her trust in him, thought, Did I turn evil today, Fawkes? I
didn’t think I was evil... Do you hate me now? If I’ve become something a
phoenix hates, maybe I should just give it up now, give up everything now
and confess—
Fawkes screamed, the most terrible cry Harry had ever heard, a
scream that set all the devices vibrating and made all the sleeping ﬁgures
start within their portraits.
It pierced through all of Harry’s defenses like a white-hot sword
*

991 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-TWO

*
*

*

through butter, collapsed all his layers like a punctured balloon popping, reshuﬄed his priorities in an instant as he remembered the one
most important thing; the tears began pouring freely from Harry’s eyes,
down his cheeks, his voice choked as the words came out of his throat
like coughing up lava—
“Fawkes says,” Harry’s voice said, “he wants me, to do, something,
about, the prisoners, in Azkaban—”
“Fawkes, no!” said the old wizard. Dumbledore strode forward,
reaching out to the phoenix with a pleading hand. The old wizard’s
voice was almost as desperate as the phoenix’s scream had been. “You
cannot ask that of him, Fawkes, he’s only a boy still!”
“You went to Azkaban,” Harry whispered, “you took Fawkes with
you, he saw—you saw—you were there, you saw—Why didn’t you do
anything? Why didn’t you let them out?”
When the instruments stopped vibrating, Harry realized that Fawkes
had screamed at the same time as his own scream, that the phoenix was
now ﬂying next to Harry and facing Dumbledore at his side, the redgolden head level with his own.
“Can you,” whispered the old wizard, “can you truly hear the voice
of the phoenix so clearly?”
Harry was sobbing almost too hard to speak, for all the metal doors
he’d passed, the voices he’d heard, the worst memories, the desperate
begging as he walked away, all of it had burst into his mind like ﬁre
at the phoenix’s scream, all the inner bulwarks smashed. Harry didn’t
know whether he could truly hear the voice of the phoenix so clearly,
whether he would have understood Fawkes without already knowing.
All Harry knew was that he had a plausible excuse to say the things
Professor Quirrell had told him he must never raise in conversation from
this day forth; because this was just what an innocent Harry would have
said, would have done, if he had heard so clearly. “They’re hurting—we
have to help them—”
“I can’t!” cried Albus Dumbledore. “Harry, Fawkes, I can’t, there’s
nothing I can do!”
Another piercing scream.
“Why not? Just go in and take them out!”
*

992 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XII

*
*

*

The old wizard wrenched his gaze from the phoenix, his eyes meeting Harry’s instead. “Harry, tell Fawkes for me! Tell him it’s not that
simple! Phoenixes aren’t mere animals but they are animals, Harry, they
can’t understand—”
“I don’t understand either,” Harry said, his voice trembling. “I don’t
understand why you’re feeding people to Dementors! Azkaban isn’t a
prison, it’s a torture chamber and you’re torturing those people to death!”
“Percival,” said the old wizard hoarsely, “Percival Dumbledore, my
own father, Harry, my own father died in Azkaban! I know, I know it
is a horror! But what would you have of me? To break Azkaban by force?
Would you have me declare open rebellion against the Ministry?”
Caw!
There was a pause, and Harry’s trembling voice said, “Fawkes doesn’t
know anything about governments, he just wants you—to take the prisoners out—of their cells—and he’ll help you ﬁght, if anyone stands in
your way—and—and so will I, Headmaster! I’ll go with you and destroy
any Dementor that comes near! We’ll worry about the political fallout
afterward, I bet that you and I together could get away with it—”
“Harry,” whispered the old wizard, “phoenixes do not understand
how winning a battle can lose a war.” Tears were streaming down the
old wizard’s cheeks, dripping into his silver beard. “The battle is all they
know. They are good, but not wise. That is why they choose wizards
to be their masters.”
“Can you bring out the Dementors to where I can get at them?”
Harry’s voice was begging, now. “Bring them out in groups of ﬁfteen—
I think I could destroy that many at a time without hurting myself—”
The old wizard shook his head. “It was hard enough to pass oﬀ the
loss of one—they might give me one more, but never two—they are considered national possessions, Harry, weapons in case of war—”
Fury blazed in Harry then, blazed up like ﬁre, it might have come
from where a phoenix now rested on his own shoulder, and it might
have come from his own dark side, and the two angers mixed within
him, the cold and the hot, and it was a strange voice that said from his
throat, “Tell me something. What does a government have to do, what
do the voters have to do with their democracy, what do the people of a
*

993 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-TWO

*
*

*

country have to do, before I ought to decide that I’m not on their side
any more?”
The old wizard’s eyes widened where he stared at the boy with a
phoenix upon his shoulder. “Harry... are those your words, or the Defense Professor’s—”
“Because there has to be some point, doesn’t there? And if it’s not
Azkaban, where is it, then?”
“Harry, listen, please, hear me! Wizards could not live together if
they each declared rebellion against the whole, every time they diﬀered!
Always there will be something —”
“Azkaban is not just something! It’s evil!”
“Yes, even evil! Even some evils, Harry, for wizards are not perfectly
good! And yet it is better that we live in peace, than in chaos; and for
you and I to break Azkaban by force would be the beginning of chaos,
can you not see it?” The old wizard’s voice was pleading. “And it is
possible to oppose the will of your fellows openly or in secret, without
hating them, without declaring them evil and enemy! I do not think the
people of this country deserve that of you, Harry! And even if some of
them did—what of the children, what of the students in Hogwarts, what
of the many good people mixed in with the bad?”
Harry looked on his shoulder at where Fawkes had perched, saw the
phoenix’s eyes gazing back at him, they did not glow and yet they blazed,
red ﬂames in a sea of golden ﬁre.
What do you think, Fawkes?
“Caw?” said the phoenix.
Fawkes didn’t understand the conversation.
The young boy looked at the old wizard, and said in a thick voice,
“Or maybe the phoenixes are wiser than us, smarter than us, maybe they
follow us around hoping that someday we’ll listen to them, someday
we’ll get it, someday we’ll just take, the prisoners, out, of their cells—”
Harry spun and pulled open the oaken door and stepped onto the
staircase and slammed the door behind him.
The stairwell began rotating, Harry began descending, and he put
his face in his hands, and began to weep.
It wasn’t until he was halfway to the bottom that he noticed the dif*

994 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XII

*
*

*

ference, noticed the warmth still spreading through him, and realized
that—
“Fawkes?” Harry whispered.
—the phoenix was still on his shoulder, perched there as he had seen
him a few times upon Dumbledore’s.
Harry looked again into the eyes, red ﬂames in golden ﬁre.
“You’re not my phoenix now... are you?”
Caw!
“Oh,” Harry said, his voice trembling a little, “I’m glad to hear that,
Fawkes, because I don’t think—the Headmaster—I don’t think he deserves—”
Harry stopped, took a breath.
“I don’t think he deserves that, Fawkes, he was just trying to be
wise...”
Caw!
“But you’re angry at him and trying to make a point. I understand.”
The phoenix nestled his head against Harry’s shoulder, and the stone
gargoyle walked smoothly aside to let Harry pass back into the corridors
of Hogwarts.

*

995 *

CHAPTER

SIXT Y-THREE

THE STANFORD PRISON
EXPERIMENT PART XIII:
,
AFTERMATHS
Aftermath, Hermione Granger:
he was just starting to close up her books and put away her homework in preparation for sleep, Padma and Mandy stacking up their
own books across the table from her, when Harry Potter walked into
the Ravenclaw common room; and it was only then that she realized,
she hadn’t seen him at all since breakfast.
That realization was rapidly stomped-on by a much more startling
one.
There was a golden-red winged creature on Harry’s shoulder, a bright
bird of ﬁre.
And Harry looked sad and worn and really tired like the phoenix
was the only thing keeping him on his feet, but there was still a warmth
about him, if you crossed your eyes you might have thought you were
looking at the Headmaster somehow, that was the impression that went
through Hermione’s mind even though it didn’t make any sense.
Harry Potter trudged across the Ravenclaw common room, past sofas full of staring girls, past cardgame-circles of staring boys, heading for
her.
In theory she wasn’t talking to Harry Potter yet, his week wasn’t up
until tomorrow, but whatever was going on was clearly a whole lot more
important than that—

S

*

997 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

“Fawkes,” Harry said, just as she was opening her mouth, “that girl
over there is Hermione Granger, she’s not talking to me right now because I’m an idiot, but if you want to be on a good person’s shoulder
she’s better than me.”
So much exhaustion and hurt in Harry Potter’s voice—
But before she could ﬁgure out what to do about it, the phoenix had
glided oﬀ Harry’s shoulder like a ﬁre creeping up a matchstick on fastforward, ﬂashing toward her; there was a phoenix ﬂying in front of her
and staring at her with eyes of light and ﬂame.
“Caw?” asked the phoenix.
Hermione stared at it, feeling like she was facing a question on a test
she’d forgotten to study for, the one most important question and she’d
gone her whole life without studying for it, she couldn’t ﬁnd anything
to say.
“I’m—” she said. “I’m only twelve, I haven’t done anything yet—”
The phoenix just glided gently around, rotating around one wingtip
like the being of light and air that it was, and soared back to Harry
Potter’s shoulder, where it settled down quite ﬁrmly.
“You silly boy,” said Padma across from her, looking like she was
deciding whether to laugh or grimace, “phoenixes aren’t for smart girls
who do their homework, they’re for idiots who charge straight at ﬁve
older Slytherin bullies. There’s a reason why the Gryﬃndor colors are
red and gold, you know.”
There was a lot of friendly laughter in the Ravenclaw common room.
Hermione wasn’t one of the laughing ones.
Neither was Harry.
Harry had put a hand over his face. “Tell Hermione I’m sorry,” he
said to Padma, his voice almost fallen to a whisper. “Tell her I forgot
that phoenixes are animals, they don’t understand time and planning,
they don’t understand people who are going to do good things later—
I’m not sure they understand really the notion of there being something
that a person is, all they see is what people do. Fawkes doesn’t know
what twelve means. Tell Hermione I’m sorry—I shouldn’t have—it just
all goes wrong, doesn’t it?”
Harry turned to go, the phoenix still on his shoulder, began slowly
*

998 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

trudging toward the staircase that led up to his dorm.
And Hermione couldn’t leave it at that, she just couldn’t leave it at
that. She didn’t know if it was her competition with Harry or something
else. She just couldn’t leave it with the phoenix turning away from her.
She had to—
Her mind keyed a frantic question to the entirety of her excellent
memory, found just one thing—
“I was going to run in front of the Dementor to try and save Harry!”
she shouted a little desperately at the red-golden bird. “I mean, I actually did start running and everything! That was stupid and courageous,
right?”
With a warbling cry the phoenix launched itself from Harry’s shoulder again, back toward her like a spreading blaze, it circled her three
times like she was the center of an inferno, and for just a moment its wing
brushed against her cheek, before the phoenix soared back to Harry.
There was a hush in the Ravenclaw common room.
“Told you so,” Harry said aloud, and then he started climbing the
stairs up to his bedroom; he seemed to climb very quickly, like he was
very light on his feet for some reason, so that in just a moment he and
Fawkes were gone.
Hermione held up a trembling hand to her cheek where Fawkes had
brushed her with his wing, a spot of warmth lingering there like that
one small patch of skin had been very gently set on ﬁre.
She’d answered the question of the phoenix, she supposed, but it felt
to her like she’d just barely squeaked by on the test, like she’d gotten a
62 and she could’ve gotten 104 if she’d tried harder.
If she’d tried at all.
She hadn’t really been trying, when she thought about it.
Just doing her homework—
Who have you saved?

* 999 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Aftermath, Fawkes:
Nightmares, the boy had expected, screams and begging and howling
hurricanes of emptiness, the discharge of the horrors being laid down
into memory, and in that fashion, perhaps, becoming part of the past.
And the boy knew that the nightmares would come.
The next night, they would come.
The boy dreamed, and in his dreams the world was on ﬁre, Hogwarts
was on ﬁre, his home was on ﬁre, the streets of Oxford were on ﬁre, all
ablaze with golden ﬂames that shone but did not consume, and all the
people walking through the blazing streets were shining with white light
brighter than the ﬁre, like they were ﬂames themselves, or stars.
The other ﬁrst-year boys came to bed, and saw it for themselves,
the wonder whose rumor they had already heard, that in his bed Harry
Potter lay silent and motionless, a gentle smile on his face, while perched
on his pillow a red-golden bird watched over him, with bright wings
swept above him like a blanket pulled over his head.
The reckoning had been put oﬀ one more night.

Aftermath, Draco Malfoy:
Draco straightened his robes, making sure the green trim was straight.
He waved his wand over his own head and said a Charm that Father
had taught him while other children were still playing in mud, a Charm
which ensured that not a single speck of lint or dust would dirty his
wizard’s robes.
Draco picked up the mysterious envelope that Father had owled him,
and tucked it into his robes. He had already used Incendio and Everto
on the mysterious note.
And then he headed oﬀ to breakfast, to seat himself on exactly the
same tick of the clock where the food appeared, if he could manage it,
so that it would seem like all others had been waiting on his appearance
to eat. Because when you were the scion of Malfoy you were ﬁrst in
everything, including breakfast, that was why.
* 1000 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

Vincent and Gregory were waiting for him outside the door of his
private room, up even before he was—though not, of course, dressed
quite as sharply.
The Slytherin common room was deserted, anyone who got up this
early was heading straight to breakfast anyway.
The dungeon halls were silent but for their own footsteps, empty and
echoing.
The Great Hall was a hubbub of alarm despite the relative few arrivals, some younger children crying, students running back and forth
between tables or standing in knots shouting at each other, a red-robed
prefect was standing in front of two green-trimmed students and yelling
at them and Snape was striding toward the mess—
The noise dimmed a little as people caught sight of Draco, as some
of the faces turned to stare at him, and fell quiet.
The food appeared on the tables. No one looked at it.
And Snape spun on his heel, abandoning his target, and headed
straight toward Draco.
A knot of fear clutched at Draco’s heart, had something happened to
Father—no, surely Father would have told him—whatever was happening, why hadn’t Father told him—
There were bags of fatigue beneath Snape’s eyes, Draco saw as their
Head of House came close, the Potions Master had never been a sharp
dresser (that was an understatement) but his robes were even dirtier and
more disarrayed this morning, spotted with extra grease.
“You haven’t heard?” hissed their Head of House as he came close.
“For pity’s sake, Malfoy, don’t you have a newspaper delivered?”
“What is it, Profe—”
“Bellatrix Black was taken from Azkaban!”
“What?” said Draco in shock, as Gregory behind him said something
he really shouldn’t have and Vincent just gasped.
Snape was gazing at him with narrowed eyes, then nodded abruptly.
“Lucius told you nothing, then. I see.” Snape gave a snort, turned away—
“Professor!” said Draco. The implications were just starting to dawn
on him, his mind spinning frantically. “Professor, what should I do—
Father didn’t instruct me—”
* 1001 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

“Then I suggest,” Snape said sneeringly, as he strode away, “that you
tell them that, Malfoy, as your father intended!”
Draco glanced back at Vincent and Gregory, though he didn’t know
why he was bothering, of course they looked even more confused than
he did.
And Draco walked forward to the Slytherin table, and sat down at
the far end, which was still empty of sitters.
Draco put a sausage omelet on his plate, began eating it with automatic motions.
Bellatrix Black had been taken from Azkaban.
Bellatrix Black had been taken from Azkaban...?
Draco didn’t know what to make of that, it was as totally unexpected
as the Sun going out—well, the Sun would expectedly go out in six billion
years but this was as unexpected as the Sun going out tomorrow. Father
wouldn’t have done it, Dumbledore wouldn’t have done it, no one should
have been able to do it—what did it mean—what use would Bellatrix be
to anyone after ten years in Azkaban—even if she got strong again, what
use was a powerful sorceress who was completely evil and insane and
fanatically devoted to a Dark Lord who wasn’t around anymore?
“Hey,” said Vincent from where he was sitting next to Draco, “I don’t
understand, boss, why’d we do that?”
“We didn’t do it, you dolt!” snapped Draco. “Oh, for Merlin’s sake,
if even you think we—didn’t your father ever tell you any stories about
Bellatrix Black? She tortured Father once, she tortured your father, she’s
tortured everyone, the Dark Lord once told her to Crucio herself and
she did it! She didn’t do crazy things to inspire fear and obedience in the
populace, she did crazy things because she’s crazy! She’s a bitch is what
she is!”
“Oh, really?” said an incensed voice from behind Draco.
Draco didn’t look up. Gregory and Vincent would be watching his
back.
“I would’ve thought you’d be happy—”
“—to hear that a Death Eater had been freed, Malfoy!”
Amycus Carrow had always been one of the other problem people;
Father had once told Draco to make sure he was never alone in the same
* 1002 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

room with Amycus...
Draco turned around and gave Flora and Hestia Carrow his Number Three Sneer, the one that said that he was in a Noble and Most Ancient House and they weren’t and yes, that mattered. Draco said in their
general direction, certainly not deigning to address them in particular,
“There’s Death Eaters and then there’s Death Eaters,” and then turned
back to his food.
There were two furious huﬀs in unison, and then two pairs of shoes
stormed oﬀ toward the other end of the Slytherin table.
It was a few minutes later that Millicent Bulstrode ran up to them,
visibly out of breath, and said, “Mr. Malfoy, did you hear?”
“About Bellatrix Black?” said Draco. “Yeah—”
“No, about Potter!”
“What?”
“Potter was going around with a phoenix on his shoulder last night,
looking like he’d been dragged through ten leagues of mud, they say that
the phoenix took him to Azkaban to try to stop Bellatrix and he fought
a duel with her and they blew up half the fortress!”
“What?” said Draco. “Oh, there is just no way that—”
Draco stopped.
He’d said that a number of times about Harry Potter and had started
to notice a trend.
Millicent ran oﬀ to tell someone else.
“You don’t really think—” said Gregory.
“I honestly don’t know anymore,” said Draco.
A few minutes later, after Theodore Nott had sat down across from
him and William Rosier had gone to sit with the Carrow twins, Vincent
nudged him and said, “There.”
Harry Potter had entered the Great Hall.
Draco watched him closely.
There was no alarm on Harry’s face as he saw, no surprise or shock,
he just looked...
It was the same distant, self-absorbed look Harry wore when he was
trying to ﬁgure out the answer to a question Draco couldn’t understand
yet.
* 1003 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Draco hastily shoved himself up from the bench of the Slytherin table, saying “Stay behind,” and walked with all decorous speed toward
Harry.
Harry seemed to notice his approach just as the other boy was turning toward the Ravenclaw table, and Draco—
—gave Harry one quick look—
—and then walked right past him, straight out of the Great Hall.
It was a minute later that Harry peered around the corner of the
small stony nook where Draco had waited, it might not fool everyone
but it would create plausible deniability.
“Quietus,” said Harry. “Draco, what—”
Draco took the envelope out of his robes. “I have a message for you
from Father.”
“Huh?” said Harry, and took the envelope from Draco, and tore it
open in a rather un-neat manner, and drew forth a sheet of parchment
and unfolded it and—
Harry gave a sharp intake of breath.
Then Harry looked at Draco.
Then Harry looked back down at the parchment.
There was a pause.
Harry said, “Did Lucius tell you to report on my reaction to this?”
Draco paused for a moment, weighing, and then opened his mouth—
“I see he did,” said Harry, and Draco cursed himself, he should’ve
known better, only it had been hard to decide. “What are you going to
tell him?”
“That you were surprised,” said Draco.
“Surprised,” Harry said ﬂatly. “Yeah. Good. Tell him that.”
“What is it?” said Draco. And then, as he saw Harry looking conﬂicted, “If you’re dealing with Father behind my back—”
And Harry, without a word, gave Draco the paper.
It said:
I know it was you.
“What the—”
“I was going to ask you that,” said Harry. “Have you got any idea
what’s up with your Dad?”
* 1004 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

Draco stared at Harry.
Then Draco said, “Did you do it?”
“What?” said Harry. “What possible reason would I—how would I—”
“Did you do it, Harry?”
“No!” Harry said. “Of course not!”
Draco had listened carefully, but he hadn’t detected any hesitation
or tremor.
So Draco nodded, and said, “I’ve got no idea what Father’s thinking
but it can’t, I mean it can’t possibly be good. And, um... people are also
saying...”
“What,” said Harry warily, “are they saying, Draco?”
“Did a phoenix really take you to Azkaban to try to stop Bellatrix
Black from escaping—”
Aftermath, Neville Longbottom:
Harry had only just sat down at the Ravenclaw table for the ﬁrst time,
hoping to grab a quick bite of food. He knew he needed to go oﬀ and
think about things, but there was a tiny remaining bit of phoenix’s peace
(even after the encounter with Draco) that he still wanted to cling to,
some beautiful dream of which he remembered nothing but the beauty;
and the part of him that wasn’t feeling peaceful was waiting for all the
anvils to ﬁnish dropping on him, so that when he went oﬀ to think and
be by himself for a while, he could batch-process all the disasters at once.
Harry’s hand grasped a fork, lifted a bite of mashed potatoes toward
his mouth—
And there was a shriek.
Every now and then someone would shout when they heard the
news, but Harry’s ears recognized this one—
Harry was up from the bench in an instant, heading toward the Hufﬂepuﬀ table, a horrible sick feeling dawning in the pit of his stomach.
It was one of those things he hadn’t considered when he’d decided to
commit the crime, because Professor Quirrell had planned for no one to
know; and now, afterward, Harry just—hadn’t thought of it—
This, Huﬄepuﬀ said with bitter intensity, is also your fault.
* 1005 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

But by the time Harry got there, Neville was sitting down and eating
fried sausage patties with Snippyﬁg Sauce.
The Huﬄepuﬀ boy’s hands were trembling, but he cut the food, and
ate it, without dropping it.
“Hello, General,” Neville said, his voice wavering only slightly. “Did
you ﬁght a duel with Bellatrix Black last night?”
“No,” Harry said. His own voice was also wavery, for some reason.
“Didn’t think so,” said Neville. There was a scraping sound as his
knife cut the sausage again. “I’m going to hunt her down and kill her,
can I count on you to help?”
There were startled gasps from the mass of Huﬄepuﬀs who had gathered around Neville.
“If she comes after you,” Harry said hoarsely, if it was all a terrible
mistake, if it was all a lie, “I’ll defend you even with my life,” won’t let
you get hurt for what I did, no matter what, “but I won’t help you go after
her, Neville, friends don’t help friends commit suicide.”
Neville’s fork paused on the way to his mouth.
Then Neville put the bite of food in his mouth, chewed again.
And Neville swallowed it.
And Neville said, “I didn’t mean right now, I mean after I graduate
Hogwarts.”
“Neville,” Harry said, keeping his voice under very careful control,
“I think, even after you graduate, that might still be a just plain stupid
idea. There’s got to be much more experienced Aurors tracking her—”
oh, wait, that’s not good—
“Listen to him!” said Ernie Macmillan, and then an older-looking
Huﬄepuﬀ girl standing close to Neville said, “Nevvy, please, think about
it, he’s right!”
Neville stood up.
Neville said, “Please don’t follow me.”
Neville walked away from all of them; Harry and Ernie reaching out
involuntarily toward him, and some of the other Huﬄepuﬀs as well.
And Neville sat down at the Gryﬃndor table, and distantly (though
they had to strain to hear) they heard Neville say, “I’m going to hunt her
down and kill her after I graduate, anyone want to help?” and at least
* 1006 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

ﬁve voices said “Yes” and then Ron Weasley said loudly, “Get in line,
you lot, I got an owl from Mum this morning, she says to tell everyone she’s called dibs” and someone said “Molly Weasley against Bellatrix
Black? Who does she even think she’s kidding—” and Ron reached over
to a plate and hefted a muﬃn—
Someone tapped Harry on the shoulder, and he turned around and
saw an unfamiliar green-trimmed older girl, who handed him a parchment envelope and then quickly strode away.
Harry stared at the envelope for a moment, then started walking toward the nearest wall. That wasn’t very private, but it should be private
enough, and Harry didn’t want to give the impression of having much
to hide.
That had been a Slytherin System delivery, what you used if you
wanted to communicate with someone without anyone else knowing
that the two of you had talked. The sender gave an envelope to someone who had a reputation for being a reliable messenger, along with ten
Knuts; that ﬁrst person would take ﬁve Knuts and pass the envelope to
another messenger along with the other ﬁve Knuts, and the second messenger would open up that envelope and ﬁnd another envelope with a
name written on it and deliver that envelope to that person. That way
neither of the two people passing the message knew both the sender and
the recipient, so no one else knew that those two parties had been in
contact...
When Harry reached the wall, he put the envelope inside his robes,
opened it beneath the folds of cloth, and carefully snuck a peek at the
parchment he drew forth.
It said,
Classroom to the left of Transﬁguration, 8 in the morning.
—LL.
Harry stared at it, trying to remember if he knew anyone with the
initials LL.
* 1007 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

His mind searched...
Searched...
Retrieved—
“The Quibbler girl?” Harry whispered incredulously, and then shut
his mouth. She was only ten years old, she shouldn’t be in Hogwarts at
all!
Aftermath, Lesath Lestrange:
Harry was standing in the unused classroom next to Transﬁguration at
8am, waiting, he’d at least managed to get some food into himself before
facing the next disaster, Luna Lovegood...
The door to the classroom opened, and Harry saw, and gave himself
a really hard mental kick.
One more thing he hadn’t thought of, one more thing he really should
have.
The older boy’s green-trimmed formal robes were askew, there were
red spots on them looking very much like small dots of fresh blood, and
one corner of his mouth had the look of a place that had been cut and
healed, by Episkey or some other minor medical Charm that didn’t quite
erase all the damage.
Lesath Lestrange’s face was streaked with tears, fresh tears and halfdried tears, and there was water in his eyes, a promise of still more on
the way. “Quietus,” said the older boy, and then “Homenum Revelio” and
some other things, while Harry thought frantically and without much
luck.
And then Lesath lowered his wand and sheathed it in his robes, and
slowly this time, formally, the older boy dropped to his knees on the
dusty classroom ﬂoor.
Bowed his head all the way down, until his forehead also touched the
dust, and Harry would have spoken but he was voiceless.
Lesath Lestrange said, in a breaking voice, “My life is yours, my Lord,
and my death as well.”
“I,” Harry said, there was a huge lump in his throat and he was having
trouble speaking, “I—” didn’t have anything to do with it, he should have
* 1008 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

been saying, should be saying right now, but then again the innocent
Harry would have had trouble speaking too—
“Thank you,” whispered Lesath, “thank you, my Lord, oh, thank
you,” the sound of a choked-oﬀ sob came from the kneeling boy, all
Harry could see of him was the hair on the back of his head, nothing
of his face. “I’m a fool, my Lord, an ungrateful bastard, unworthy to
serve you, I cannot abase myself enough, for I—I shouted at you after
you helped me, because I thought you were refusing me, and I didn’t
even realize until this morning that I’d been such a fool as to ask you in
front of Longbottom—”
“I didn’t have anything to do with it,” Harry said.
(It was still very hard to tell an outright lie like that.)
Slowly Lesath raised his head from the ﬂoor, looked up at Harry.
“I understand, my Lord,” said the older boy, his voice wavering a
little, “you do not trust my cunning, and indeed I have shown myself a
fool... I only wanted to say to you, that I am not ungrateful, that I know
it must have been hard enough to save only one person, that they’re
alerted now, that you can’t—get Father—but I am not ungrateful, I will
never be ungrateful to you again. If ever you have a use for this unworthy
servant, call me wherever I am, and I will answer, my Lord—”
“I was not involved in any way.”
(But it got easier each time.)
Lesath gazed up at Harry, said uncertainly, “Am I dismissed from
your presence, my Lord...?”
“I am not your Lord.”
Lesath said, “Yes, my Lord, I understand,” and pushed himself back
up from the ﬂoor, stood straight and bowed deeply, then backed away
from Harry until he turned to open the classroom door.
As Lesath’s hand touched the doorknob, he paused.
Harry couldn’t see Lesath’s face, as the older boy’s voice said, “Did
you send her to someone who would take care of her? Did she ask about
me at all?”
And Harry said, his voice perfectly level, “Please stop that. I was not
involved in any way.”
“Yes, my Lord, I’m sorry, my Lord,” said Lesath’s voice; and the
* 1009 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Slytherin boy opened the door and went out and shut the door behind
him. His feet sped up as he ran away, but not fast enough that Harry
couldn’t hear him start sobbing.
Would I cry? wondered Harry. If I knew nothing, if I was innocent,
would I cry right now?
Harry didn’t know, so he just kept looking at the door.
And some unbelievably tactless part of him thought, Yay, we completed a quest and got a minion—
Shut up. If you ever want to vote on anything ever again... shut up.
Aftermath, Amelia Bones:
“Then his life isn’t in danger, I take it,” said Amelia.
The healer, a stern-eyed old man who wore his robes white (he was a
Muggleborn and honoring some strange tradition of Muggles, of which
Amelia had never asked, although privately she thought it made him
look too much like a ghost), shook his head and said, “Deﬁnitely not.”
Amelia looked at the human form resting unconscious on the
healer’s bed, the burned and blasted ﬂesh, the thin sheet that covered
him for modesty’s sake having been peeled back at her command.
He might make a full recovery.
He might not.
The healer had said it was too early to say.
Then Amelia looked at the other witch in the room, the detective.
“And you say,” Amelia said, “that the burning matter was Transﬁgured from water, presumably in the form of ice.”
The detective nodded her head, and said, sounding puzzled, “It could
have been much worse, if not for—”
“How very nice of them,” she spat, and then pressed a weary hand to
her forehead. No... no, it had been intended as a kindness. By the ﬁnal
stage of the escape there would be no point in trying to fool anyone.
Whoever had done this, then, had been trying to mitigate the damage—
and they’d been thinking in terms of Aurors breathing the smoke, not of
anyone being attacked with the ﬁre. If it had been them still in control,
no doubt, they would have steered the rocker more mercifully.
*

1010 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

But Bellatrix Black had ridden the rocker out of Azkaban alone,
all the watching Aurors had agreed on that, they’d had their AntiDisillusionment Charms active and there had been only one woman on
that rocker, though the rocker had sported two sets of stirrups.
Some good and innocent person, capable of casting the Patronus
Charm, had been tricked into rescuing Bellatrix Black.
Some innocent had fought Bahry One-Hand, carefully subduing an
experienced Auror without signiﬁcantly injuring him.
Some innocent had Transﬁgured the fuel for the Muggle artifact on
which the two of them had been to ride out of Azkaban, making it from
frozen water for the beneﬁt of her Aurors.
And then their usefulness to Bellatrix Black had ended.
You would have expected anyone capable of subduing Bahry OneHand to have foreseen that part. But then you wouldn’t have expected
anyone who could cast the Patronus Charm to try rescuing Bellatrix
Black in the ﬁrst place.
Amelia passed her hand down over her eyes, closing them for a moment in silent mourning. I wonder who it was, and how You-Know-Who
manipulated them... what story they could possibly have been told...
She didn’t even realize until a moment later that the thought meant
she was starting to believe. Perhaps because, no matter how diﬃcult it
was to believe Dumbledore, it was becoming more diﬃcult not to recognize the hand of that cold, dark intelligence.

Aftermath, Albus Dumbledore:
It might have been only ﬁfty-seven seconds before breakfast ended and
he might have needed four twists of his Time-Turner, but in the end,
Albus Dumbledore did make it.
“Headmaster?” squeaked the polite voice of Professor Filius Flitwick,
as the old wizard passed him by on his way to his seat. “Mr. Potter left
a message for you.”
The old wizard stopped. He looked inquiringly at the Charms Professor.
*

1011 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

“Mr. Potter said that after he woke up, he realized how unfair had
been the things he said to you after Fawkes screamed. Mr. Potter said
that he wasn’t saying anything about anything else, just apologizing for
that one part.”
The old wizard kept looking at his Charms Professor, and still did
not speak.
“Headmaster?” squeaked Filius.
“Tell him I said thank you,” said Albus Dumbledore, “but that it is
wiser to listen to phoenixes than to wise old wizards,” and sat down at
his place three seconds before all the food vanished.

Aftermath, Professor Quirrell:
“No,” Madam Pomfrey snapped at the child, “you may not see him! You
may not pester him! You may not ask him one little question! He is to
rest in bed and do nothing for at least three days!”

Aftermath, Minerva McGonagall:
She was heading toward the inﬁrmary, and Harry Potter was leaving it,
when they passed each other.
The look he gave her wasn’t angry.
It wasn’t sad.
It didn’t say much at all.
It was like... like he was looking at her just long enough to make it
clear that he wasn’t deliberately avoiding looking at her.
And then he looked away before she could ﬁgure out what look to
give him in return; as though he wanted to spare her that, as well.
He didn’t say anything as he walked past her.
Neither did she.
What could there possibly be to say?

*

1012 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

Aftermath, Fred and George Weasley:
They actually yelped out loud, when they turned the corner and saw
Dumbledore.
It wasn’t that the Headmaster had popped up out of nowhere and
was staring at them with a stern expression. Dumbledore was always
doing that.
But the wizard was dressed in formal black robes and looking very
ancient and very powerful and he was giving the two of them a sharp
look.
“Fred and George Weasley!” spake Dumbledore in a Voice of Power.
“Yes, Headmaster!” they said, snapping upright and giving him a
crisp military salute they’d seen in some old pictures.
“Hear me well! You are the friends of Harry Potter, is this so?”
“Yes, Headmaster!”
“Harry Potter is in danger. He must not go beyond the wards of
Hogwarts. Listen to me, sons of Weasley, I beg you listen: you know
that I am as Gryﬃndor as yourselves, that I too know there are higher
rules than rules. But this, Fred and George, this one thing is of the most
terrible importance, there must be no exception this time, small or great!
If you help Harry to leave Hogwarts he may die! Does he send you on a
mission, you may go, does he ask you to bring him items, you may help,
but if he asks you to smuggle his own person out of Hogwarts, you must
refuse! Do you understand?”
“Yes, Headmaster!” They said it without even thinking, really, and
then exchanged uncertain looks with each other—
The bright blue eyes of the Headmaster were intent upon them. “No.
Not without thinking. If Harry asks you to bring him out, you must
refuse, if he asks you to tell him the way, you must refuse. I will not ask
you to report him to me, for that I know you would never do. But beg
him on my behalf to go to me, if it is of such importance, and I will guard
him as he walks. Fred, George, I am sorry to strain your friendship so,
but it is his life.”
The two of them looked at each other for a long while, not communicating, only thinking the same things at the same time.
*

1013 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

They looked back at Dumbledore.
They said, with a chill running through them as they spoke the name,
“Bellatrix Black.”
“You may safely assume,” said the Headmaster, “that it is at least that
bad.”
“Okay—”
“—got it.”
Aftermath, Alastor Moody and Severus Snape:
When Alastor Moody had lost his eye, he had commandeered the services of a most erudite Ravenclaw, Samuel H. Lyall, whom Moody mistrusted slightly less than average because Moody had refrained from reporting him as an unregistered werewolf; and he had paid Lyall to compile a list of every known magical eye, and every known hint to their
location.
When Moody had gotten the list back, he hadn’t bothered reading
most of it; because at the top of the list was the Eye of Vance, dating back
to an era before Hogwarts, and currently in the possession of a powerful
Dark Wizard ruling over some tiny forgotten hellhole that wasn’t in
Britain or anywhere else he’d have to worry about silly rules.
That was how Alastor Moody had lost his left foot and acquired the
Eye of Vance, and how the oppressed souls of Urulat had been liberated
for a period of around two weeks before another Dark Wizard moved in
on the power vacuum.
He’d considered going after the Left Foot of Vance next, but had
decided against it after he realized that would be just what they were expecting.
Now Mad-Eye Moody was turning slowly, always turning, surveying
the graveyard of Little Hangleton. It should have been a lot gloomier,
that place, there should have been some mark of all the death which
had been planned there in Voldie’s meetings, but in the broad daylight it
seemed like nothing but a grassy place marked by ordinary tombstones,
demarcated by the chained twists of fragile, easily climbable metal that
Muggles used instead of wards. (Moody could not comprehend what
*

1014 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

the Muggles were thinking on that score, if they were pretending to have
wards, or what, and he had decided not to ask whether Muggle criminals
respected the pretense.)
Moody didn’t actually need to turn to survey the graveyard, of
course.
The Eye of Vance saw the full globe of the world in every direction
around him, no matter where it was pointing.
But there was no particular reason to let a former Death Eater like
Severus Snape know that.
Sometimes people called Moody ‘paranoid’.
Moody always told them to survive a hundred years of hunting Dark
Wizards and then get back to him about that.
Mad-Eye Moody had once worked out how long it had taken him, in
retrospect, to achieve what he now considered a decent level of caution—
weighed up how much experience it had taken him to get good instead of
lucky—and had begun to suspect that most people died before they got
there. Moody had once expressed this thought to Lyall, who had done
some ciphering and ﬁguring, and told him that a typical Dark Wizard
hunter would die, on average, eight and a half times along the way to
becoming ‘paranoid’. This explained a great deal, assuming Lyall wasn’t
lying.
Yesterday, Albus Dumbledore had told Mad-Eye Moody that the
Dark Lord had used unspeakable dark arts to survive the death of his
body, and was now awake and abroad, seeking to regain his power and
begin the Wizarding War anew.
Someone else might have reacted with incredulity.
“I can’t believe you lot never told me about this resurrection thing,”
Mad-Eye Moody said with considerable acerbity. “D’you realize how
long it’ll take me to do the grave of every ancestor of every Dark Wizard
I’ve ever killed who could’ve been smart enough to make a horcrux?
You’re not just now doing this one, are you?”
“I redose this one every year,” Severus Snape said calmly, uncapping
the third ﬂask of what the man had claimed would be seventeen bottles, and beginning to wave his wand over it. “The other ancestral graves
we’ve been able to locate were poisoned with only the long-lasting sub*

1015 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

stances, since some of us have less free time than yourself.”
Moody watched the ﬂuid spiraling out of the vial and vanishing, to
appear within the bones where marrow had once been. “But you think
it’s worth the eﬀort of the trap, instead of just Vanishing the bones.”
“He does have other avenues to life, should he perceive this one
blocked,” Snape said dryly, uncapping a fourth bottle. “And before you
ask, it must be the original grave, the place of ﬁrst burial, the bone removed during the ritual and not before. Thus he cannot have retrieved it
earlier; and also there is no point in substituting the skeleton of a weaker
ancestor. He would notice it had lost all potency.”
“Who else knows about this trap?” Moody demanded.
“You. Me. The Headmaster. No one else.”
Moody snorted. “Pfah. Did Albus tell Amelia, Bartemius, and that
McGonagall woman about the resurrection ritual?”
“Yes—”
“If Voldie ﬁnds out that Albus knows about the resurrection ritual
and that Albus told them, Voldie’ll ﬁgure that Albus told me, and Voldie
knows I’d think of this.” Moody shook his head in disgust. “What’re
these other ways Voldie could come back to life?”
Snape’s hand paused on the ﬁfth bottle (it was all Disillusioned, of
course, the whole operation was Disillusioned, but that meant less than
nothing to Moody, it just marked you in his Eye’s sight as trying-tohide), and the former Death Eater said, “You don’t need to know.”
“You’re learning, son,” said Moody with mild approval. “What’s in
the bottles?”
Snape opened the ﬁfth bottle, gestured with his wand to begin the
substance ﬂowing toward the grave, and said, “This one? A Muggle narcotic called lsd. A conversation yesterday put me in mind of Muggle
things, and lsd seemed the most interesting option, so I hurried to obtain some. If it is incorporated into the resurrection potion, I suspect its
eﬀects will be permanent.”
“What does it do?” said Moody.
“It is said that the eﬀects are impossible to describe to anyone who
has not used it,” drawled Snape, “and I have not used it.”
Moody nodded approval as Snape opened the sixth ﬂask. “What
*

1016 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

about that one?”
“Love potion.”
“Love potion?” said Moody.
“Not of the standard sort. It is meant to trigger a two-way bond with
an unbearably sweet Veela woman named Verdandi who the Headmaster
hopes might be able to redeem even him, if they truly loved each other.”
“Gah!” said Moody. “That bloody sentimental fool—”
“Agreed,” Severus Snape said calmly, his attention focused on his
work.
“Tell me you’ve at least got some Malaclaw venom in there.”
“Second ﬂask.”
“Iocane powder.”
“Either the fourteenth or ﬁfteenth bottle.”
“Bahl’s Stupefaction,” Moody said, naming an extremely addictive
narcotic with interesting side eﬀects on people with Slytherin tendencies;
Moody had once seen an addicted Dark Wizard go to ridiculous lengths
to get a victim to lay hands on a certain exact portkey, instead of just
having someone toss the target a trapped Knut on their next visit to
town; and after going to all that work, the addict had gone to the further
eﬀort to lay a second Portus, on the same portkey, which had, on a second
touch, transported the victim back to safety. To this day, even taking the
drug into account, Moody could not imagine what could have possibly
been going through the man’s mind at the time he had cast the second
Portus.
“Tenth vial,” said Snape.
“Basilisk venom,” oﬀered Moody.
“What?” spat Snape. “Snake venom is a positive component of the
resurrection potion, you fool! Not to mention that it would dissolve the
bone and all the other substances! And where would we even get—”
“Calm down, son, I was just checking to see if you could be trusted.”
Mad-Eye Moody continued his (secretly unnecessary) slow turning,
surveying the graveyard, and the Potions Master continued pouring.
“Hold on,” Moody said suddenly. “How do you know this is really
where—”
“Because it says ‘Tom Riddle’ on the easily moved headstone,” Snape
*

1017 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

said dryly. “And I have just won ten Sickles from the Headmaster, who
bet you would think of that before the ﬁfth bottle. So much for constant
vigilance.”
There was a pause.
“How long did it take Albus to reali—”
“Three years after we learned of the ritual,” said Snape, in a tone
not quite like his usual sardonic drawl. “In retrospect, we should have
consulted you earlier.”
Snape uncapped the ninth bottle.
“We poisoned all the other graves as well, with long-lasting substances,” remarked the former Death Eater. “It is possible that we are
in the correct graveyard. He may not have planned this far ahead back
when he was slaughtering his family, and he cannot move the grave itself—”
“The true location doesn’t look like a graveyard any more,” Moody
said ﬂatly. “He moved all the other graves here and Memory-Charmed
the Muggles. Not even Bellatrix Black would be told anything about
that until just before the ritual started. No one knows the true location
now except him.”
They continued their futile work.

Aftermath, Blaise Zabini:
The Slytherin common room could be accurately and precisely described as a remilitarized zone; the moment you stepped through the
portrait hole you would see that the left half of the room was Deﬁnitely
Not Talking to the right half and vice versa. It was very clear, it did not
need to be explained to anyone, that you did not have the option of not
taking sides.
At a table in the exact middle of the room, Blaise Zabini sat by himself, reading a book and smirking. He had a reputation now, and meant
to keep it.

*

1018 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

Aftermath, Daphne Greengrass and Tracey Davis:
“You doing anything interesting today?” said Tracey.
“Nah,” said Daphne, “just some reading.”
Aftermath, Harry Potter:
If you went high enough in Hogwarts, you didn’t see many other people
around, just corridors and windows and staircases and the occasional
portrait, and now and then some interesting sight, such as a bronze statue
of a furry creature like a small child, holding a peculiar ﬂat spear...
If you went high enough in Hogwarts, you didn’t see many other
people around, which suited Harry.
There were much worse places to be trapped, Harry supposed. In
fact you probably couldn’t think of anywhere better to be trapped than
an ancient castle with a fractal ever-changing structure that meant you
couldn’t ever run out of places to explore, full of interesting people
and interesting books and incredibly important knowledge unknown
to Muggle science.
If Harry hadn’t been told that he couldn’t leave, he probably
would’ve jumped at the chance to spend more time in Hogwarts, he
would’ve plotted and connived to get it. Hogwarts was literally optimal, not in all the realms of possibility maybe, but certainly on the real
planet Earth, it was the Maximum Fun Location.
How could the castle and its grounds seem so much smaller, so much
more conﬁning, how could the rest of the world become so much more
interesting and important, the instant Harry had been told that he wasn’t
allowed to leave? He’d spent months here and hadn’t felt claustrophobic
then.
You know the research on this, observed some part of himself, it’s
just standard scarcity eﬀects, like that time where as soon as a county outlawed phosphate detergents, people who’d never cared before drove to the
next county in order to buy huge loads of phosphate detergent, and surveys
showed that they rated phosphate detergents as gentler and more eﬀective and
even easier-pouring... and if you give two-year-olds a choice between a toy in
*

1019 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

the open and one protected by a barrier they can go around, they’ll ignore the
toy in the open and go for the one behind the barrier... salespeople know that
they can sell things just by telling the customer it might not be available...
it was all in Cialdini’s book Inﬂuence, everything you’re feeling right now,
the grass is always greener on the side that’s not allowed.
If Harry hadn’t been told that he couldn’t leave, he probably
would’ve jumped at the chance to stay at Hogwarts over the summer...
...but not the rest of his life.
That was sort of the problem, really.
Who knew whether there was still a Dark Lord Voldemort for him
to defeat?
Who knew whether He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named still existed outside of the imagination of a possibly-not-just-pretending-to-be-crazy old
wizard?
Lord Voldemort’s body had been found burned to a crisp, there
couldn’t really be such things as souls. How could Lord Voldemort still
be alive? How did Dumbledore know that he was alive?
And if there wasn’t a Dark Lord, Harry couldn’t defeat him, and he
would be trapped in Hogwarts forever.
...maybe he would be legally allowed to escape after he graduated his
seventh year, six years and four months and three weeks from now. It
wasn’t that long as lengths of time went, it only seemed like long enough
for protons to decay.
Only it wasn’t just that.
It wasn’t just Harry’s freedom that was at stake.
The Headmaster of Hogwarts, the Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot, the Supreme Mugwump of the International Confederation of
Wizards, was quietly sounding the alarm.
A false alarm.
A false alarm which Harry had triggered.
You know, said the part of him that reﬁned his skills, didn’t you sort
of ponder, once, how every diﬀerent profession has a diﬀerent way to be excellent, how an excellent teacher isn’t like an excellent plumber; but they all
have in common certain methods of not being stupid; and that one of the
most important such techniques is to face up to your little mistakes before
* 1020 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

they turn into big mistakes?
...although this already seemed to qualify as a big mistake, actually...
The point being, said his inner monitor, it’s getting worse literally by the
minute. The way spies turn people is, they get them to commit a little sin, and
then they use the little sin to blackmail them into a bigger sin, and then they
use that sin to make them do even bigger things and then the blackmailer
owns their soul.
Didn’t you once think about how the person being blackmailed, if they
could foresee the whole path, would just decide to take the punch on the ﬁrst
step, take the hit of exposing that ﬁrst sin? Didn’t you decide that you would
do that, if anyone ever tried to blackmail you into doing something major
in order to conceal something little? Do you see the similarity here, Harry
James Potter-Evans-Verres?
Only it wasn’t little, it already wasn’t little, there would be a lot of
very powerful people extremely angry at Harry, not just for the false
alarm but for freeing Bellatrix from Azkaban, if the Dark Lord did exist
and did come after him later, that war might already be lost—
You don’t think they’ll be impressed by your honesty and rationality and
foresight in stopping this before it snowballs even further?
Harry did not, in fact, think this; and after a moment’s reﬂection,
whichever part of himself he was talking to, had to agree that this was
absurdly optimistic.
His wandering feet took him near an open window, and Harry went
over, and leaned his arms on the ledge, and stared down at the grounds
of Hogwarts from high above.
Brown that was barren trees, yellow that was dead grass, ice-colored
ice that was frozen creeks and frozen streams... whichever school oﬃcial
had dubbed it ‘The Forbidden Forest’ really hadn’t understood marketing, the name just made you want to go there even more. The sun was
sinking in the sky, for Harry had been thinking for some hours now,
thinking mostly the same thoughts over and over, but with key diﬀerences each time, like his thoughts were not going in circles, but climbing
a spiral, or descending it.
He still couldn’t believe that he’d gone through the entire thing with
Azkaban—he’d switched oﬀ his Patronus before it took all his life, he’d
*

1021 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

stunned an Auror, he’d ﬁgured out how to hide Bella from the Dementors, he’d faced down twelve Dementors and scared them away, he’d invented the rocket-assisted broomstick, and ridden it—he’d gone through
the entire thing without ever once rallying himself by thinking, I have to
do this... because... I promised Hermione I’d come back from lunch! It felt
like some sort of irrevocably missed opportunity, like, having done it
wrong that time, he would never be able to get it right no matter what
sort of challenge he faced the next time, or what sort of promise he’d
made to who. Because then he would just be doing it awkwardly and deliberately to make up for having missed it the ﬁrst time around, instead
of being able to make the same sort of heroic declarations he’d be able
to make if he’d managed to remember his promise to Hermione. Like
that one wrong turn was irrevocable, you only got one chance, had to
do it right on the ﬁrst try...
He should’ve remembered that promise to Hermione before going to
Azkaban.
Why had he decided to do that, again?
My working hypothesis is that you’re stupid, said Huﬄepuﬀ.
That is not a useful fault analysis, thought Harry.
If you want a little more detail, said Huﬄepuﬀ, the Defense Professor
of Hogwarts was all like ‘Let’s get Bellatrix Black out of Azkaban!’ and you
were like ‘Okay!’
Hold on, that’s not fair—
Hey, said Huﬄepuﬀ, notice how, once you’re all the way up here, and
the individual trees sort of blur together, you can actually see the shape of the
forest?
Why had he done it...?
Not because of any cost-beneﬁt calculation, that was for sure. He’d
been too embarrassed to pull out a sheet of paper and start calculating
expected utilities, he’d worried that Professor Quirrell would stop respecting him if he said no or even hesitated too much to help a maiden
in distress.
He’d thought, somewhere deep inside him, that if your mysterious
teacher oﬀered you the ﬁrst mission, the ﬁrst chance, the call to adventure, and you said no, then your mysterious teacher walked away from
* 1022 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

you in disgust, and you never got another chance to be a hero...
...yeah, that had been it. In retrospect, that had been it. He’d gone
and started thinking his life had a plot and here was a plot twist, as opposed to, oh, say, here was a proposal to break Bellatrix Black out of
Azkaban. That had been the true and original reason for the decision
in the split second where it had been made, his brain perceptually recognizing the narrative where he said ‘no’ as dissonant. And when you
thought about it, that wasn’t a rational way to make decisions. Professor
Quirrell’s ulterior motive to obtain the last remains of Slytherin’s lost
lore, before Bellatrix died and it was irrevocably forgotten, seemed impressively sane by comparison; a beneﬁt commensurate with what had
appeared at the time as a small risk.
It didn’t seem fair, it didn’t seem fair, that this was what happened if
he lost his grip on his rationality for just a tiny fraction of a second, the
tiny fraction of a second required for his brain to decide to be more comfortable with ‘yes’ arguments than ‘no’ arguments during the discussion
that had followed.
From high above, far enough above that the individual trees blurred
together, Harry stared out at the forest.
Harry didn’t want to confess and ruin his reputation forever and get
everyone angry at him and maybe end up killed by the Dark Lord later.
He’d rather be trapped in Hogwarts for six years than face that. That
was how he felt. And so it was in fact helpful, a relief, to be able to cling
to a single decisive factor, which was that if Harry confessed, Professor
Quirrell would go to Azkaban and die there.
(A catch, a break, a stutter in Harry’s breathing.)
If you phrased it that way... why, you could even pretend to be a hero,
instead of a coward.
Harry lifted his eyes from the Forbidden Forest, looked up at the
clear blue forbidden sky.
Stared out the glass panes at the big bright burning thing, the ﬂuﬀy
things, the mysterious endless blue in which they were embedded, that
strange new unknown place.
It... actually did help, it helped quite a lot, to think that his own
troubles were nothing compared to being in Azkaban. That there were
* 1023 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

people in the world who were really in trouble and Harry Potter was not
one of them.
What was he going to do about Azkaban?
What was he going to do about magical Britain?
...which side was he on, now?
In the bright light of day, everything that Albus Dumbledore had
said certainly sounded a lot wiser than Professor Quirrell. Better and
brighter, more moral, more convenient, wouldn’t it be nice if it were
true. And the thing to remember was that Dumbledore believed things
because they sounded nice, but Professor Quirrell was the one who was
sane.
(Again the catch in his breathing, it happened each time he thought
of Professor Quirrell.)
But just because something sounded nice, didn’t make it wrong, either.
And if the Defense Professor did have a ﬂaw in his sanity, it was that
his outlook on life was too negative.
Really? inquired the part of Harry that had read eighteen million experimental results about people being too optimistic and overconﬁdent.
Professor Quirrell is too pessimistic? So pessimistic that his expectations routinely undershoot reality? Stuﬀ him and put him in a museum, he’s unique.
Which one of you two planned the perfect crime, and then put in all the error margin and fallbacks that ended up saving your butt, just in case the
perfect crime went wrong? Hint hint, his name wasn’t Harry Potter.
But “pessimistic” wasn’t the correct word to describe Professor Quirrell’s problem—if a problem it truly was, and not the superior wisdom
of experience. But to Harry it looked like Professor Quirrell was constantly interpreting everything in the worst possible light. If you handed
Professor Quirrell a glass that was 90% full, he’d tell you that the 10%
empty part proved that no one really cared about water.
That was a very good analogy, now that Harry thought about it.
Not all of magical Britain was like Azkaban, that glass was well over
half full...
Harry stared up at the bright blue sky.
...although, following the analogy, if Azkaban existed, then maybe
* 1024 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

it did prove that the 90% good part was there for other reasons, people
trying to make a show of kindness as Professor Quirrell had put it. For if
they were truly kind they would not have made Azkaban, they would
storm the fortress to tear it down... wouldn’t they?
Harry stared up at the bright blue sky. If you wanted to be a rationalist you had to read an awful lot of papers on ﬂaws in human nature,
and some of those ﬂaws were innocent logical failures, and some of them
looked a lot darker.
Harry stared up at the bright blue sky, and thought of the Milgram
experiment.
Stanley Milgram had done it to investigate the causes of World War II,
to try to understand why the citizens of Germany had obeyed Hitler.
So he had designed an experiment to investigate obedience, to see if
Germans were, for some reason, more liable to obey harmful orders
from authority ﬁgures.
First he’d run a pilot version of his experiment on American subjects,
as a control.
And afterward he hadn’t bothered trying it in Germany.
Experimental apparatus: A series of 30 switches set in a horizontal
line, with labels starting at ‘15 volts’ and going up to ‘450 volts’, with
labels for each group of four switches. The ﬁrst group of four labeled
‘Slight Shock’, the sixth group labeled ‘Extreme Intensity Shock’, the
seventh group labeled ‘Danger: Severe Shock’, and the two last switches
left over labeled just ‘XXX’.
And an actor, a confederate of the experimenter, who had appeared
to the true subjects to be someone just like them: someone who had
answered the same ad for participants in an experiment on learning, and
who had lost a (rigged) lottery and been strapped into a chair, along with
the electrodes. The true experimental subjects had been given a slight
shock from the electrodes, just so that they could see that it worked.
The true subject had been told that the experiment was on the eﬀects
of punishment on learning and memory, and that part of the test was to
see if it made a diﬀerence what sort of person administered the punishment; and that the person strapped to the chair would try to memorize
sets of word pairs, and that each time the ‘learner’ got one wrong, the
* 1025 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

‘teacher’ was to administer a successively stronger shock.
At the 300-volt level, the actor would stop trying to call out answers
and begin kicking at the wall, after which the experimenter would instruct the subjects to treat non-answers as wrong answers and continue.
At the 315-volt level the pounding on the wall would be repeated.
After that nothing would be heard.
If the subject objected or refused to press a switch, the experimenter,
maintaining an impassive demeanor and dressed in a gray lab coat, would
say ‘Please continue’, then ‘The experiment requires that you continue’,
then ‘It is absolutely essential that you continue’, then ‘You have no
other choice, you must go on’. If the fourth prod still didn’t work, the
experiment halted there.
Before running the experiment, Milgram had described the experimental setup, and then asked fourteen psychology seniors what percentage of subjects they thought would go all the way up to the 450volt level, what percentage of subjects would press the last of the two
switches marked XXX, after the victim had stopped responding.
The most pessimistic answer had been 3%.
The actual number had been 26 out of 40.
The subjects had sweated, groaned, stuttered, laughed nervously, bitten their lips, dug their ﬁngernails into their ﬂesh. But at the experimenter’s prompting, they had, most of them, gone on administering
what they believed to be painful, dangerous, possibly lethal electrical
shocks. All the way to the end.
Harry could hear Professor Quirrell laughing, in his mind; the Defense Professor’s voice saying something along the lines of: Why, Mr. Potter, even I had not been so cynical; I knew men would betray their most
cherished principles for money and power, but I did not realize that a stern
look also suﬃced.
It was dangerous, to try and guess at evolutionary psychology if you
weren’t a professional evolutionary psychologist; but when Harry had
read about the Milgram experiment, the thought had occurred to him
that situations like this had probably arisen many times in the ancestral environment, and that most potential ancestors who’d tried to disobey Authority were dead. Or that they had, at least, done less well
* 1026 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

for themselves than the obedient. People thought themselves good and
moral, but when push came to shove, some evolved switch ﬂipped in
their brain, and it was suddenly a lot harder to heroically defy Authority than they thought. Even if you could do it, it wouldn’t be easy,
it wouldn’t be some eﬀortless display of heroism. You would tremble,
your voice would break, you would be afraid; would you be able to defy
Authority even then?
Harry blinked, then; because his brain had just made the connection
between Milgram’s experiment and what Hermione had done on her
ﬁrst day of Defense class, she’d refused to shoot a fellow student, even
when Authority had told her that she must, she had trembled and been
afraid but she had still refused. Harry had seen that happen right in front
of his own eyes and he still hadn’t made the connection until now...
Harry stared down at the reddening horizon, the Sun was sinking
lower, the sky fading, darkening, even if most of it was still blue, soon it
would turn to night. The gold and red colors of Sun and sunset reminded
him of Fawkes; and Harry wondered, for a moment, if it must be a sad
thing to be a phoenix, and call and cry and scream without being heeded.
But Fawkes would never give up, as many times as he died he would
always be reborn, for Fawkes was a being of light and ﬁre, and despairing
over Azkaban belonged to the darkness just as much as did Azkaban
itself.
If you were given a glass half-empty and half-full, then that was the
way reality was, that was the truth and it was so; but you still had a choice
of how to feel about it, whether you would despair over the empty half
or rejoice in the water that was there.
Milgram had tried certain other variations on his test.
In the eighteenth experiment, the experimental subject had only
needed to call out the test words to the victim strapped into the chair,
and record the answers, while someone else pressed the switches. It was
the same apparent suﬀering, the same frantic pounding followed by silence; but it wasn’t you pressing the switch. You just watched it happen,
and read the questions to the person being tortured.
37 of 40 subjects had continued their participation in that experiment to the end, the 450-volt end marked ‘XXX’.
* 1027 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

And if you were Professor Quirrell, you might have decided to feel
cynical about that.
But 3 out of 40 subjects had refused to participate all the way to the
end.
The Hermiones.
They did exist, in the world, the people who wouldn’t ﬁre a Simple
Strike Hex at a fellow student even if the Defense Professor ordered them
to do it. The ones who had sheltered Gypsies and Jews and homosexuals
in their attics during the Holocaust, and sometimes lost their lives for it.
And were those people from some other species than humanity? Did
they have some extra gear in their heads, some additional chunk of neural circuitry, which lesser mortals did not possess? But that was not
likely, given the logic of sexual reproduction which said that the genes
for complex machinery would be scrambled beyond repair, if they were
not universal.
Whatever parts Hermione was made from, everyone had those same
parts inside them somewhere...
...well, that was a nice thought but it wasn’t strictly true, there was
such a thing as literal brain damage, people could lose genes and the
complex machine could stop working, there were sociopaths and psychopaths, people who lacked the gear to care. Maybe Lord Voldemort
had been born like that, or maybe he had known good and yet still chosen evil; at this point it didn’t matter in the slightest. But a supermajority
of the population ought to be capable of learning to do what Hermione
and Holocaust resisters did.
The people who had been run through the Milgram experiment,
who had trembled and sweated and nervously laughed as they went all
the way to pressing the switches marked ‘XXX’, many of them had written to thank Milgram, afterward, for what they had learned about themselves. That, too, was part of the story, the legend of that legendary
experiment.
The Sun had almost sunk below the horizon now, a last golden tip
peeking above the faraway tops of trees.
Harry looked at it, that tip of Sun, his glasses were supposed to be
proof against uv so he ought to be able to look directly at it without
* 1028 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

damaging his eyes.
Harry stared directly at it, that tiny fraction of the Light that was not
obscured and blocked and hidden, even if it was only 3 parts out of 40,
the other 37 parts were there somewhere. The 7.5% of the glass that was
full, which proved that people really did care about water, even if that
force of caring within themselves was too often defeated. If people truly
didn’t care, the glass would have been truly empty. If everyone had been
like You-Know-Who inside, secretly cleverly selﬁsh, there would have
been no resisters to the Holocaust at all.
Harry looked at the sunset, on the second day of the rest of his life,
and knew that he had switched sides.
Because he couldn’t believe in it any more, he couldn’t really, not
after going to Azkaban. He couldn’t do what 37 out of 40 people would
vote for him to do. Everyone might have inside them what it took to be
Hermione, and someday they might learn; but someday wasn’t now, not
here, not today, not in the real world. If you were on the side of 3 out of
40 people then you weren’t a political majority, and Professor Quirrell
had been right, Harry would not bow his head in submission when that
happened.
There was a sort of awful appropriateness to it. You shouldn’t go to
Azkaban and come back having not changed your mind about anything
important.
So is Professor Quirrell right, then? asked Slytherin. Leaving out
whether he’s good or evil, is he right? Are you, to them, whether they know
it or not, their next Lord? We’ll just leave out the Dark part, that’s him being cynical again. But is it your intention now to rule? I’ve got to say, that
makes even me nervous.
Do you think you can be trusted with power? said Gryﬃndor. Isn’t
there some sort of rule that people who want power shouldn’t have it? Maybe
we should make Hermione the ruler instead.
Do you think you’re ﬁt to run a society and not have it collapse into
total chaos inside of three weeks ﬂat? said Huﬄepuﬀ. Imagine how loudly
Mum would scream if she’d heard you’d been elected Prime Minister, now
ask yourself, are you sure she’s wrong about that?
Actually, said Ravenclaw, I have to point out that all this political stuﬀ
* 1029 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

sounds overwhelmingly boring. How about if we leave all the electioneering
to Draco and stick to science? It’s what we’re actually good at, and that’s been
known to improve the human condition too, y’know.
Slow down, thought Harry at his components, we don’t have to decide everything right now. We’re allowed to ponder the problem as fully as
possible before coming to a solution.
The last part of the Sun sank below the horizon.
It was strange, this feeling of not quite knowing who you were, which
side you were on, of having not already made up your mind about something as major as that, there was an unfamiliar sensation of freedom in
it...
And that reminded him of what Professor Quirrell had said to his
last question, which reminded him of Professor Quirrell, which made
it hard once more to breathe, started that burning sensation in Harry’s
throat, sent his thoughts around that loop of the climbing spiral once
again.
Why was he so sad, now, whenever he thought of Professor Quirrell?
Harry was used to knowing himself, and he didn’t know why he felt so
sad...
It felt like he’d lost Professor Quirrell forever, lost him in Azkaban,
that was how it felt. As surely as if the Defense Professor had been eaten
by Dementors, consumed in the empty voids.
Lost him! Why did I lose him? Because he said Avada Kedavra and there
was in fact a perfectly good reason even though I didn’t see it for a couple of
hours? Why can’t things go back to the way they were?
But then it hadn’t been the Avada Kedavra. That might have played a
part in irreversibly collapsing a structure of rationalizations and ﬂinches
and carefully not thinking about certain things. But it hadn’t been the
Avada Kedavra, that hadn’t been the disturbing thing that Harry had
seen.
What did I see...?
Harry looked at the fading sky.
He’d seen Professor Quirrell turn into a hardened criminal while
facing the Auror, and the apparent change of personalities had been effortless, and complete.
* 1030 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

Another woman had known the Defense Professor as ‘Jeremy Jaﬀe’.
How many diﬀerent people are you, anyway?
I cannot say that I bothered keeping count.
You couldn’t help but wonder...
...whether ‘Professor Quirrell’ was just one more name on the list,
just one more person that had been turned into, made up in the service
of some unguessable goal.
Harry would always be wondering now, every time he talked to Professor Quirrell, if it was a mask, and what motive was behind that mask.
With every dry smile, Harry would be trying to see what was pulling
the levers on the lips.
Is that how other people will start thinking of me, if I get too Slytherin?
If I pull oﬀ too many plots, will I never be able to smile at anyone again,
without them wondering what I really mean by it?
Maybe there was some way to restore a trust in surface appearances and make a normal human relationship possible again, but Harry
couldn’t think of what it might be.
That was how Harry had lost Professor Quirrell, not the person, but
the... connection...
Why did that hurt so much?
Why did it feel so lonely, now?
Surely there were other people, maybe better people, to trust and
befriend? Professor McGonagall, Professor Flitwick, Hermione, Draco,
not to mention Mum and Dad, it wasn’t like Harry was alone...
Only...
A choking sensation grew in Harry’s throat as he understood.
Only Professor McGonagall, Professor Flitwick, Hermione, Draco,
they all of them sometimes knew things that Harry didn’t, but...
They did not excel above Harry within his own sphere of power;
such genius as they possessed was not like his genius, and his genius was
not like theirs; he might look upon them as peers, but not look up to
them as his superiors.
None of them had been, none of them could ever be...
Harry’s mentor...
That was who Professor Quirrell had been.
*

1031 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

That was who Harry had lost.
And the manner in which he had lost his ﬁrst mentor might or might
not allow Harry to ever get him back. Maybe someday he would know
all Professor Quirrell’s hidden purposes and the doubts between them
would go away; but even if that seemed possible, it didn’t seem very
probable.
There was a gust of wind, outside Hogwarts, it bent the empty trees,
rippled the lake whose heart was still unfrozen, made a whispering sound
as it slid past the window that looked upon the half-twilit world, and
Harry’s thoughts wandered outward for a time.
Then returned inward again, to the next step of the spiral.
Why am I diﬀerent from the other children my age?
If Professor Quirrell’s answer to that had been an evasion, then it
was a very well-calculated one. Deep enough and complex enough, sufﬁciently full of suggestions of hidden meaning, to serve as a trap for a
Ravenclaw who couldn’t be diverted by less. Or maybe Professor Quirrell had meant his answer honestly. Who knew what motive might have
pulled that lever on those lips?
I will say this much, Mr. Potter: You are already an Occlumens, and I
think you will become a perfect Occlumens before long. Identity does not
mean, to such as us, what it means to other people. Anyone we can imagine,
we can be; and the true diﬀerence about you, Mr. Potter, is that you have an
unusually good imagination. A playwright must contain his characters, he
must be larger than them in order to enact them within his mind. To an
actor or spy or politician, the limit of his own diameter is the limit of who
he can pretend to be, the limit of which face he may wear as a mask. But
for such as you and I, anyone we can imagine, we can be, in reality and
not pretense. While you imagined yourself a child, Mr. Potter, you were a
child. Yet there are other existences you could support, larger existences, if
you wished. Why are you so free, and so great in your circumference, when
other children your age are small and constrained? Why can you imagine
and become selves more adult than a mere child of a playwright should be
able to compose? That I do not know, and I must not say what I guess. But
what you have, Mr. Potter, is freedom.
If that was a snow job it was one heck of a distracting one.
* 1032 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

And the still more worrisome thought was that Professor Quirrell
hadn’t realized how disturbed Harry would be, how wrong that speech
would sound to him, how much damage it would do to his trust in Professor Quirrell.
There ought to always be one real person who you truly were, at the
center of everything...
Harry stared out at the falling night, the gathering darkness.
...right?

**
*
It was almost bedtime when Hermione heard the scattered intakes of
breath and looked up from her copy of Beauxbatons: A History to see
the missing boy, the boy who had been misplaced at lunch that Sunday,
whose dinner nonappearance had been accompanied by rumors—and
she hadn’t believed them because they were completely ridiculous, but
she’d felt a little queasiness inside—that he’d withdrawn from Hogwarts
in order to hunt down Bellatrix Black.
“Harry!” she shrieked, she didn’t even realize that she was talking
directly to him for the ﬁrst time in a week, or notice how some other
students started at the sound of her yelling all the way across the Ravenclaw common room.
Harry’s eyes had already lifted to her, he was already walking toward
her, so she stopped halfway out of her chair—
A few moments later, Harry was seated across from her, and he was
putting away his wand after casting a Quieting barrier around them.
(And an awful lot of Ravenclaws were trying not to look like they
were watching.)
“Hey,” Harry said. His voice wavered. “I missed you. You’re... going
to talk to me again, now?”
Hermione nodded, she just nodded, she couldn’t think of what to
say. She’d missed Harry too, but she was realizing, with a guilty sort of
feeling, that it might’ve been a lot worse for him. She had other friends,
Harry... it didn’t feel fair, sometimes, that Harry talked to only her like
* 1033 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

that, so that she had to talk to him; but Harry had a look about him like
unfair things had been happening to him, too.
“What’s been going on?” she said. “There’s all sorts of rumors. There
were people saying you’d run oﬀ to ﬁght Bellatrix Black, there were
people saying you’d run oﬀ to join Bellatrix Black—” and those rumors
had said that Hermione had just made up the thing about the phoenix,
and she’d yelled that the whole Ravenclaw common room had seen it,
so then the next rumor had claimed she’d made up that part too, which
was stupidity of such an inconceivable level that it left her completely
ﬂabbergasted.
“I can’t talk about it,” Harry said in a bare whisper. “Can’t talk about
a lot of it. I wish I could tell you everything,” his voice wavered, “but
I can’t... I guess, if it helps or anything, I’m not going to lunch with
Professor Quirrell any more...”
Harry put his hands over his face, then, covering his eyes.
Hermione felt the queasy feeling all through her stomach.
“Are you crying?” said Hermione.
“Yeah,” said Harry, his voice sounding a little breathy. “I don’t want
anyone else to see.”
There was a little silence. Hermione wanted to help but she didn’t
know what to do about a boy crying, and she didn’t know what was
happening; she felt like huge things were happening around her—no,
around Harry—and if she knew what they were she would probably be
scared, or alarmed, or something, but she didn’t know anything.
“Did Professor Quirrell do something wrong?” she said at last.
“That’s not why I can’t go to lunch with him any more,” Harry said,
still in that bare whisper with his hands pressed over his eyes. “That was
the Headmaster’s decision. But yeah, Professor Quirrell said some things
to me that made me trust him less, I guess...” Harry’s voice sounded very
shaky. “I’m feeling kind of alone right now.”
Hermione put her hand on her cheek, for a moment, where Fawkes
had touched her yesterday. She’d kept thinking about that touch, over
and over, maybe because she wanted it to be important, to mean something to her...
“Is there any way I can help?” she said.
* 1034 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

“I want to do something normal,” Harry said from behind his hands.
“Something very normal for ﬁrst-year Hogwarts students. Something
eleven-year-olds and twelve-year-olds like us are supposed to do. Like
play a game of Exploding Snap or something... I don’t suppose you have
the cards or know the rules or anything like that?”
“Um... I don’t know the rules, actually...” said Hermione. “I know
they explode.”
“I don’t suppose Gobstones?” said Harry.
“Don’t know the rules and they spit at you. Those are boy games,
Harry!”
There was a pause. Harry ground his hands against his face to wipe it,
and then took his hands away; and then he was looking at her, looking a
little helpless. “Well,” Harry said, “what do wizards and witches our age
do, when they play, you know, the kind of pointless silly games we’re
supposed to play at this age?”
“Hopscotch?” said Hermione. “Jump-rope? Unicorn attack? I don’t
know, I read books!”
Harry started laughing, and Hermione started giggling along with
him even though she didn’t know quite why, but it was funny.
“I guess that helped a little,” said Harry. “Actually I think it helped
more than playing Gobstones for an hour could’ve possibly helped, so
thanks for being you. And no matter what, I’m not having anyone
Obliviate everything I know about calculus. I’d sooner die.”
“What?” said Hermione. “Why—why would you ever want to do
that?”
Harry stood up from the table, and there was a rush of restored background noise as his rise broke the Quieting Charm. “I’m a tad sleepy so
I’m going oﬀ to bed,” Harry said, now his voice was ordinary and wry,
“I’ve got some lost time to make up for, but I’ll see you at breakfast, and
then at Herbology, if that’s all right. Not to mention it wouldn’t be fair
to dump all my depression on you. G’night, Hermione.”
“Good night, Harry,” she said, feeling very confused and alarmed.
“Pleasant dreams.”
Harry stumbled a little as she said that, and then he continued on
toward the stairs that led to the ﬁrst-year-boys’ dorms.
* 1035 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

**
*
Harry turned the Quieting Charm all the way up, on the head of his
bedboard, so that he wouldn’t wake anyone else up if he screamed.
Set his alarm to wake him up for breakfast (if he wasn’t up already
by that hour, if indeed he slept at all).
Got into bed, laid down—
—felt the lump beneath his pillow.
Harry stared up at the canopy above his bed.
Hissed under his breath, “Oh, you’ve got to be kidding me...”
It took a few seconds before Harry could muster the heart to sit up
in bed, pull the blanket over himself and his pillow to obscure the deed
from the other boys, cast a low-intensity Lumos and see what was under
his pillow.
There was a parchment, and a deck of playing cards.
The parchment read,
A little bird told me that Dumbledore has shut the door of your cage.
On this occasion, I’ve got to admit Dumbles might have a point.
Bellatrix Black is loosed upon the world once more, and that’s not
good news for any good person. Honestly, if it was me in Dumbledore’s shoes, I’d probably be doing the same thing right now, no
oﬀense.
But just in case there’s more to it than that... The Salem Witches’
Institute in America accepts boys as well, despite the name. They’re
good people and I’m certain they would protect you even from Dumbledore, if you needed it. Britain thinks you need Dumbledore’s permission to emigrate to magical America, but magical America disagrees. So in the ﬁnal extremity, get outside the wards of Hogwarts
and tear in half the King of Hearts from this deck of cards.
That you should resort to it only in the ﬁnal extremity goes without saying.
Be well, Harry Potter.
—Santa Claus
* 1036 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

Harry stared down at the pack of cards.
It couldn’t take him anywhere else, not right now, portkeys didn’t
work here.
But he still felt unnerved about the prospect of picking it up, even to
hide it inside his trunk...
Well, he’d already picked up the parchment, which could just as easily
have been enchanted with a trap, if a trap was involved.
But still.
“Wingardium Leviosa,” Harry whispered, and Hovered the packet
of cards to lie next to where his alarm clock rested in a pocket of the
headboard. He’d deal with it tomorrow.
And then Harry lay back in bed, and closed his eyes, to dream without any phoenix to protect him, and pay his reckoning.

**
*
He came awake with a gasp of horror, not a scream, he’d yet to scream
this night, but his blanket was all tangled around him from where his
sleeping form had jerked as he dreamed of running, trying to get away
from the gaps in space that were pursuing him through a corridor of
metal lit by dim gaslight, an endlessly long corridor of metal lit by dim
gaslight, and he hadn’t known, in the dream, that touching those voids
meant he would die horribly and leave his still-breathing body empty
behind him, all he’d known was that he had to run and run and run
from the wounds in the world sliding after him—
Harry started to cry again, it wasn’t for the horror of the chase, it
was that he’d run away while someone behind him was screaming for
help, screaming for him to come back and save her, help her, she was
being eaten, she was going to die, and in the dream Harry had run away
instead of helping her.
“Don’t go!” The voice came in a scream from behind the metal door.
“No, no, no, don’t go, don’t take it away, don’t don’t don’t—”
Why had Fawkes ever rested on his shoulder? He’d walked away.
Fawkes should hate him.
* 1037 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-THREE

*
*

*

Fawkes should hate Dumbledore. He’d walked away.
Fawkes should hate everyone—
The boy wasn’t awake, wasn’t dreaming, his thoughts were jumbled
and confused in the shadowlands that bordered sleep and waking, unprotected by the safety rails that his aware mind imposed on itself, the
careful rules and censors. In that shadowland his brain had woken up
enough to think, but something else was too sleepy to act; his thoughts
ran free and wild, unconstrained by his self-concept, his waking self’s
ideals of what he shouldn’t think. That was the freedom of his brain’s
dreams, as his self-concept slept. Free to repeat, over and over, Harry’s
new worst nightmare:
“No, I didn’t mean it, please don’t die!”
“No, I didn’t mean it, please don’t die!”
“No, I didn’t mean it, please don’t die!”
A rage grew in him alongside the self-loathing, a terrible hot wrath /
icy cold hatred, for the world which had done that to her / for himself,
and in his half-awake state Harry fantasized escapes, fantasized ways out
of the moral dilemma, he imagined himself hovering above the vast triangular horror of Azkaban, and whispering an incantation unlike any
syllables that had ever been heard before on Earth, whispers that echoed
all the way across the sky and were heard on the other side of the world,
and there was a blast of silver Patronus ﬁre like a nuclear explosion that
tore apart all the Dementors in an instant and ripped apart the metal
walls of Azkaban, shattered the long corridors and all the dim orange
lights, and then a moment later his brain remembered that there were
people in there, and rewrote the half-dream fantasy to show all the prisoners laughing as they ﬂew away in ﬂocks from the burning wreck of
Azkaban, the silver light restoring the ﬂesh to their limbs as they ﬂew,
and Harry started crying harder into his pillow, because he couldn’t do
it, because he wasn’t God—
He’d sworn upon his life and magic and his art as a rationalist, he’d
sworn by all he held sacred and all his happy memories, he’d given his
oath so now he had to do something, had to do something, had to do
something—
Maybe it was pointless.
* 1038 *

**
*

THE STANFORD PRISON EXPERIMENT XIII:
AFTERMATHS

*
*

*

Maybe trying to follow rules was pointless.
Maybe you just burned down Azkaban however.
And in fact he’d sworn he’d do it, so now that was what he had to
do.
He’d just do whatever it took to get rid of Azkaban, that was all. If
that meant ruling Britain, ﬁne, if that meant ﬁnding a spell to whisper
that would echo all across the sky, whatever, the important thing was to
destroy Azkaban.
That was the side he was on, that was who he was, so there, it was
done.
His waking mind would have demanded a lot more details before
accepting that as an answer, but in his half-dreaming state it felt like
enough of a resolution to let his tired mind fall truly asleep again, and
dream the next nightmare.
Final Aftermath:
She came awake with a gasp of horror, a disruption of her breathing
that left her feeling deprived of air and yet her lungs didn’t move, she
woke up with an unvoiced scream on her lips and no words, no words
came forth, for she could not understand what she had seen, she could not
understand what she had seen, it was too large for her to encompass and
still taking shape, she could not put words to that formless shape and so
she could not discharge it, could not discharge it and become innocent
and unknowing once more.
“What time is it?” she whispered.
Her golden jeweled alarm clock, the beautiful and magical and expensive alarm clock that the Headmaster had given her as a gift upon her
employment at Hogwarts, whispered back, “Around two in the morning. Go back to sleep.”
Her sheets were soaked in sweat, her nightclothes soaked in sweat,
she took her wand from beside the pillow and cleaned herself up before
she tried to go back to sleep, she tried to go back to sleep and eventually
succeeded.
Sybill Trelawney went back to sleep.
* 1039 *

CHAPTER

SIXT Y-FOUR

OMAKE FILES, PART III:
THE OTHER FANFICTIONS
Y
OU COULD’V E BEEN
READING
of
L
ordtheRatîonalîtY

Frodo glanced at all the faces, but they were not turned to him. All the
Council sat with downcast eyes, as if in deep thought. A great dread fell
on him, as if he was awaiting the pronouncement of some doom that
he had long foreseen and vainly hoped might after all never be spoken.
An overwhelming longing to rest and remain at peace by Bilbo’s side
in Rivendell ﬁlled all his heart. At last with an eﬀort he spoke, and
wondered to hear his own words, as if some other will was using his
small voice.
“We cannot,” said Frodo. “We must not. Do you not see? It is exactly
what the Enemy desires. All of this he has foreseen.”
The faces turned to him, puzzled the Dwarves and grave the Elves;
sternness in the eyes of the Men; and so keen the gazes of Elrond and
of Gandalf that Frodo almost could not withstand it. It was very hard,
then, not to grasp the Ring in his hand, and harder still not to put it on,
to face them as only Frodo.
“Do you not question it?” Frodo said, thin like the wind his voice,
and wavering like a breeze. “You have chosen, of all things, to send
*

1041 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

the Ring into Mordor; should you not wonder? How did it come to
this? That we might, of all our choices, do that single thing our Enemy
most desires? Perhaps the Cracks of Doom are already guarded, strongly
enough to hold oﬀ Gandalf and Elrond and Glorﬁndel all together; or
perhaps the Master of that place has cooled the lava there, set it to trap
the Ring so that he may simply bring it out after it is thrown in...” A
memory of awful clarity came over Frodo then, and a ﬂash of black
laughter, and the thought came to him that it was just what the Enemy
would do. Only the thought came to him so: thus it would amuse me to
do, if I meant to rule...
There were doubtful glances exchanged within the council; Glóin
and Gimli and Boromir were now looking at the Elves more skeptically
than before, like they had awoken out of a dream of words.
“The Enemy is very wise,” said Gandalf, “and weighs all things to a
nicety in the scales of his malice. But the only measure that he knows
is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into his heart the
thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that having the Ring we
may seek to destroy it—”
“He will think of it!” cried Frodo. He struggled for words, trying to
convey things that had once seemed perfect in his comprehension, and
then faded like melting snow. “If the Enemy thought that all his foes
were moved by desire for power alone—he would guess wrongly, over
and over, and the Maker of this Ring would see that, he would know
that somewhere he had made a mistake!” Frodo’s hands stretched forth
pleadingly.
Boromir stirred, and his voice was doubtful. “You speak fair of the
Enemy,” said Boromir, “for one of his foes.”
Frodo’s mouth opened and shut in desperate bewilderment; for
Frodo knew, he knew the Man was mad, but he could think of nothing to say.
Then Bilbo spoke, and his withered voice silenced the whole room,
even Elrond who had been about to speak. “Frodo is right, I fear,” whispered the old hobbit. “I remember, I remember what it was like. To see
with the Black Sight. I remember. The Enemy will think that we might
not trust one another, that the weaker among us will propose to destroy
* 1042 *

**
*

OMAKE FILES III: THE OTHER FANFICTIONS
Y
OU COULD’V E BEEN READING

*
*

*

the Ring so that the stronger may not have it. He knows that even one
not truly good might still cry to destroy the Ring, to make a show of
pretended goodness. And the Enemy will not think it impossible that
such a decision be made by this council, for you see, he does not trust us
to be wise.” A whispering chuckle rose from the ancient hobbit’s throat.
“And if he did—why, he would still guard the Cracks of Doom. It would
cost him little.”
Now foreboding was on the faces even of the Elves, and the Wise;
Elrond had frowned, and the sharp eyebrows of Gandalf furrowed.
Frodo gazed at them all, feeling a wildness come over him, a despair;
and as his heart weakened a shadow came over his vision, a darkness and
a wavering. From within the shadow Frodo saw Gandalf, and the wizard’s strength was revealed as weakness, and his wisdom folly. For Frodo
knew, as the Ring seemed to drag and weigh on his breast, that Gandalf
had not thought at all of history and lore, when the wizard spoke of how
the Enemy would not understand any desire save power; that Gandalf
had not remembered how Sauron had cast down and corrupted the Men
of Númenor in the days of their glory. Just as it had not occurred to
Gandalf that the Enemy might learn to comprehend foes of goodwill by
looking...
Frodo’s gaze swung to Elrond, but there was no hope there, no answer and no rescue in the shadowy vision; for Elrond had let Isildur go,
carrying the Ring from the Cracks of Doom where it should have been
destroyed, to the cost of all this war. Not for Isildur’s own sake, not for
friendship had it been done, for the Ring had killed Isildur in the end,
and far worse fates could have followed him. But the Doom that had
stemmed from Isildur’s deed would have seemed unsure to Elrond then,
unsure and distant in time; and yet the cost to Elrond himself of taking
his sword’s pommel to the back of Isildur’s head would have been surer,
and nearer...
As though in desperation, Frodo turned to look at Aragorn, the
weathered man who had donned his travel-worn clothes for this council, the heir of kings who spoke softly to hobbits. But Frodo’s vision
seemed to double, and in the shadowy second image Frodo saw a Man
who had spent too much of his youth among Elves, who had learned to
* 1043 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

wear humble and stained clothes amid the gold and jewels, knowing he
could not match them wisdom for wisdom, and hoping to outplay them
in a fashion they would not emulate...
In the sight of the Ring, which was the sight of the Ring’s own Maker,
all noble things faded into stratagems and lies, a world of grey and darkness without any light. They had not made their choices knowingly,
Gandalf or Elrond or Aragorn; the impulses had come from the dark
hidden parts of themselves, the black secret depths which the Ring had
rendered plain in Frodo’s vision. Would they outthink the Shadow,
when they could not comprehend even their own selves, or the forces
that moved them?
“Frodo!” came the sharp whisper of Bilbo’s voice, and Frodo came
to himself, and halted his hand reaching up toward where the Ring lay
on his breast, on its chain, dragging like a vast stone around his neck.
Reaching up to grasp the Ring wherein all answers lay.
“How did you bear this thing?” Frodo whispered to Bilbo, as if the
two of them were the only souls in the room, though all the Council
watched them. “For years? I cannot imagine it.”
“I kept it locked in a room to which only Gandalf had the key,” said
his uncle, “and when I began to imagine ways to open it, I remembered
Gollum.”
A shudder went through Frodo, remembering the tales. The horror
of the Misty Mountains, thinking, always thinking in the dark; ruling
the goblins from the shadows and ﬁlling the tunnels with traps; but for
Bilbo wearing the ring that ﬁrst time not a single dwarf would have lived.
And now, Legolas the Elf had told them, Gollum had given up on sending his agents against the Shire, had at last found the courage to leave his
mountains and seek the Ring himself. That was Gollum, the fate which
Frodo would share himself, if the Ring were not destroyed.
Only they had no way to destroy the Ring.
The Shadow had foreseen every move they could make. Had almost—Frodo still could not imagine how it had been done, how the
Shadow had arranged such a thing—had almost maneuvered the Council
into sending the Ring straight into Mordor with only a tiny guard set
on it, as they would have done if Frodo and Bilbo had not been there.
* 1044 *

**
*

OMAKE FILES III: THE OTHER FANFICTIONS
Y
OU COULD’V E BEEN READING

*
*

*

And having foregone that swiftest of all possible defeats, the only
question remaining was how long it would take to lose. Gandalf had
delayed too long, delayed far too long to set this march in motion. It
could have been so easy, if only Bilbo had set out eighty years earlier,
if only Bilbo had been told what Gandalf had already suspected, if only
Gandalf’s heart had not silently ﬂinched away from the prospect of being
embarrassingly wrong...
Frodo’s hand spasmed on his breast; without thought, his ﬁngers
began to rise again toward the vast weight of the chain on which the
Ring hung.
All he had to do was put on the Ring.
Just that, and all would become clear to him, once more the slowness and mud would leave his thoughts, all possibilities and futures transparent to him, he would see through the Shadow’s plans and devise an
irresistible counterstroke—
—and he would never be able to take oﬀ the Ring, not again, not by
any will that would be left to him. All Frodo had of those moments
were fading memories, but he knew that it had felt like dying, to let all
his towers of thought collapse and become only Frodo once more. It
had felt like dying, he remembered that much of Weathertop even if he
remembered little else. And if he did wear the Ring again, it would be
better to die with it on his ﬁnger, to end his life while he was still himself;
for Frodo knew that he could not withstand the eﬀects of wearing the
Ring a second time, not afterward when the limitless clarity was lost to
him...
Frodo looked around the Council, at the poor lost leaderless Wise,
and he knew they could not defeat the Shadow by their own strength.
“I will wear it one last time,” Frodo said, his voice broken and failing,
as he had known from the beginning that he would say in the end, “one
last time to ﬁnd the answer for this Council, and then there will be other
hobbits.”
“No!” screamed the voice of Sam, as the other hobbit began to rush
forward from where he had hidden; even as Frodo, with movement as
swift and precise as a Nazgûl, took out the Ring from beneath his shirt;
and somehow Bilbo was already standing there and had already thrust
* 1045 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

his ﬁnger through.
It all happened before even Gandalf’s staﬀ could point, before
Aragorn could level the hilt-shard of his sword; the Dwarves shouted
in shock, and the Elves were dismayed.
“Of course,” said Bilbo’s voice, as Frodo began to weep, “I see it now,
I understand everything at last. Listen, listen and swiftly, here is what
you must do—”

**
*

456
With a critical eye, Peter looked over the encamped Centaurs with their
bows, Beavers with their long daggers, and talking Bears with their chainmail draped over them. He was in charge, because he was one of the
mythical Sons of Adam and had declared himself High King of Narnia; but the truth was he didn’t really know much about encampments,
weapons, and guard patrols. In the end all he could see was that they all
looked proud and conﬁdent, and Peter had to hope they were right about
that; because if you couldn’t believe in your own people, you couldn’t
believe in anyone.
“They’d scare me, if I had to ﬁght ‘em,” Peter said ﬁnally, “but I don’t
know if it’s enough to beat... her.”
“You don’t suppose this mysterious lion will actually show up and
help us, d’you?” said Lucy. Her voice was very quiet, so that none of
the creatures around them would hear. “Only it’d be nice to really have
him, don’t you think, instead of just letting people think that he put us
in charge?”
Susan shook her head, shaking the magical arrows in the quiver
on her back. “If there was really someone like that,” Susan said, “he
wouldn’t have let the White Witch cover the land in winter for a hundred years, would he?”
“I had the strangest dream,” Lucy said, her voice even quieter, “where
we didn’t have to organize any creatures or convince them to ﬁght, we
just walked into this place and the lion was already here, with all the
* 1046 *

**
*

OMAKE FILES III: THE OTHER FANFICTIONS
Y
OU COULD’V E BEEN READING

*
*

*

armies already mustered, and he went and rescued Edmund, and then
we rode alongside him into this tremendous battle where he killed the
White Witch...”
“Did the dream have a moral?” said Peter.
“I don’t know,” said Lucy, blinking and looking a little puzzled. “In
the dream it all seemed pointless somehow.”
“I think maybe the land of Narnia was trying to tell you,” said Susan,
“or maybe it was just your own dreams trying to tell you, that if there
was really such a person as that lion, there’d be no use for us.”

**
*

ERDŐS IN CHAINS
“How could you do it, Anita?” said Richard, his voice very tight. “How
could you coauthor a paper with Jean-Claude? You study the undead,
you don’t collaborate with them on papers!”
“And what about you?” I spat. “You coauthored a paper with Sylvie!
It’s all right for you to be proliﬁc but not me?”
“I’m the head of her institute,” Richard growled. I could feel the waves
of science radiating oﬀ him; he was angry. “I have to work with Sylvie, it
doesn’t mean anything! I thought our own research was special, Anita!”
“It is,” I said, feeling helpless about my inability to explain things to
Richard. He didn’t understand the thrill of being a polymath, the new
worlds that were opening up to me. “I didn’t share our research with
anyone—”
“But you wanted to,” said Richard.
I didn’t say anything, but I knew that the look on my face said it all.
“God, Anita, you’ve changed,” said Richard. He seemed to slump in
on himself. “Do you realize that the monsters are joking about Blake
numbers, now? I used to be your partner in everything, and now—I’m
just another werewolf with a Blake number of 1.”

**
*
* 1047 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

ThunderSmarts
“I am sick of this!” shouted Liono. “Sick of doing this every single week!
Our species was capable of interstellar travel, Panthro, I know the quantities of energy involved! There is no way you can’t build a nuke or steer
an asteroid or somehow blow up that ever-living idiot’s pyramid!”

**
*

He-Man and the Masters of Rationality
“Fabulous secret knowledge was revealed to me on the day I held
aloft my magic book and said: By the power of Bayes’s Theorem!”

**
*

* 1048 *

**
*

OMAKE FILES III: THE OTHER FANFICTIONS
Y
OU COULD’V E BEEN READING

*
*

*

Fate/Sane Night
I am the core of my thoughts
Belief is my body
And choice is my blood
I have revised over a thousand judgments
Unafraid of loss
Nor aware of gain
Have withstood pain to update many times
Waiting for truth’s arrival.
This is the one uncertain path.
My whole life has been...
Unlimited Bayes Works!

**
*

Tengen Toppa Gurren Rationality 40K
I have a truly marvelous story for this crossover which this margin is too
narrow to contain.

**
*

Utilitarian Twilight
“Edward,” said Bella tenderly. She reached up a hand and stroked his
cold, sparkling cheek. “You don’t have to protect me from anything. I’ve
listed out all the upsides and all the downsides, assigned them consistent
relative weights, and it’s just really obvious that the beneﬁts of becoming
a vampire outweigh the drawbacks.”
“Bella,” Edward said, and swallowed desperately. “Bella—”
“Immortality. Perfect health. Awakening psychic powers. Easy
enough to survive on animal blood once you do it. Even the beauty,
Edward, there are people who would give their lives to be pretty, and
* 1049 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

don’t you dare call them shallow until you’ve tried being ugly. Do you
think I’m scared of the word ‘vampire’? I’m tired of your arbitrary deontological constraints, Edward. The whole human species ought to
be in on your fun, and people are dying by the thousands even as you
hesitate.”
The gun in his lover’s hand was cold against his forehead. It wouldn’t
kill him, but it would disable him for long enough—

* 1050 *

CHAPTER

SIXT Y-FI V E

CONTAGIOUS LIES
ermione Granger had read somewhere once, that one of the keys
to staying thin was to pay attention to the food you ate, to notice
yourself eating it, so that you were satisﬁed with the meal. This morning
she’d made herself toast, and put butter on the toast, and cinnamon on
the butter, and it really should’ve been enough to get her to notice, this
time, the goodness that was in front of her...
Without noticing the cinnamon or the butter, without noticing the
food or that she was eating, Hermione swallowed another bite of toast,
and said, “Can you try explaining that again? I’m still completely ﬂabbergasted.”
“It’s pretty straightforward, if you think like a Light-Side Slytherin,”
said the boy that everyone else in school, excepting only the two of them,
now believed to be her true love. Harry Potter’s spoon absentmindedly
stirred his breakfast cereal; he hadn’t taken many bites of it this morning,
not that Hermione had seen. “Every good thing in the world brings its
own opposition into existence. Phoenixes are no exception.”
Hermione took another unnoticed bite out of her buttered and cinnamoned toast, and said, “How can anyone not understand that Fawkes
thinks you’re a good enough person to ride around on your shoulder?
He wouldn’t do that with a Dark Wizard! He just wouldn’t!”
And she hadn’t yelled at anyone about Fawkes’s touch on her own
cheek, because she knew it wouldn’t be right—that if a phoenix touched
you, you weren’t supposed to brag about it, that wasn’t what a phoenix
was for.
But she’d really hoped that it would squash the rumors about Harry
Potter going evil and Hermione Granger following him down.

H

*

1051 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

And it hadn’t.
And she truly couldn’t understand why not.
Harry ate another bite of his cereal, his eyes going distant now, no
longer meeting her own. “Think of it this way: You skip school one day,
and you lie and tell your teacher you were sick. The teacher tells you to
bring a doctor’s note, so you forge one. The teacher says she’s going to
call the doctor to check, so you have to give her a fake number for the
doctor, and get a friend to pretend to be the doctor when she calls—”
“You did what?”
Harry looked up from his cereal then, and now he was smiling. “I’m
not saying I really did that, Hermione...” Then his eyes abruptly dropped
back down to his cereal. “No. Just an example. Lies propagate, that’s
what I’m saying. You’ve got to tell more lies to cover them up, lie about
every fact that’s connected to the ﬁrst lie. And if you kept on lying,
and you kept on trying to cover it up, sooner or later you’d even have
to start lying about the general laws of thought. Like, someone is selling you some kind of alternative medicine that doesn’t work, and any
double-blind experimental study will conﬁrm that it doesn’t work. So if
someone wants to go on defending the lie, they’ve got to get you to disbelieve in the experimental method. Like, the experimental method is just
for merely scientiﬁc kinds of medicine, not amazing alternative medicine
like theirs. Or a good and virtuous person should believe as strongly as
they can, no matter what the evidence says. Or truth doesn’t exist and
there’s no such thing as objective reality. A lot of common wisdom like
that isn’t just mistaken, it’s anti-epistemology, it’s systematically wrong.
Every rule of rationality that tells you how to ﬁnd the truth, there’s
someone out there who needs you to believe the opposite. If you once
tell a lie, the truth is ever after your enemy; and there’s a lot of people
out there telling lies—” Harry’s voice stopped.
“What does that have to do with Fawkes?” she said.
Harry withdrew his spoon from his cereal, and pointed in the direction of the Head Table. “The Headmaster has a phoenix, right? And
he’s Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot? So he’s got political opponents,
like Lucius. Now, d’you think that opposition is going to just roll over
and surrender, because Dumbledore has a phoenix and they don’t? Do
* 1052 *

**
*

CONTAGIOUS LIES

*
*

*

you think they’ll admit that Fawkes is even evidence that Dumbledore’s
a good person? Of course not. They’ve got to invent something to say
that makes Fawkes... not important. Like, phoenixes only follow people
who charge straight at anyone they think is evil, so having a phoenix
just means you’re an idiot or a dangerous fanatic. Or, phoenixes just follow people who are pure Gryﬃndor, so Gryﬃndor they don’t have the
virtues of other Houses. Or it just shows how much courage a magical animal thinks you have, nothing else, and it wouldn’t be fair to
judge politicians based on that. They have to say something to deny the
phoenix. I bet Lucius didn’t even have to make up anything new. I bet
it had all been said before, centuries ago, since the ﬁrst time someone
had a phoenix riding on his shoulder, and someone else wanted people
not to take that into account as evidence. I bet by the time Fawkes came
along it was already common wisdom, it would have just seemed strange
to take into account who a phoenix liked or disliked. It would be like
a Muggle newspaper testing political candidates to rate their level of scientiﬁc literacy. Every force for Good that exists in this universe, there’s
someone else who beneﬁts from people discounting it, or fencing it into
a narrow box where it can’t get to them.”
“But—” Hermione said. “Okay, I see why Lucius Malfoy doesn’t
want anyone to think that Fawkes matters, but why does anyone who
isn’t a bad guy believe it?”
Harry Potter gave a little shrug. His spoon dropped back into his
cereal, and went on stirring without a pause. “Why does any kind of
cynicism appeal to people? Because it seems like a mark of maturity, of
sophistication, like you’ve seen everything and know better. Or because
putting something down feels like pushing yourself up. Or they don’t
have a phoenix themselves, so their political instinct tells them there’s
no advantage to be gained from saying nice things about phoenixes. Or
because being cynical feels like knowing a secret truth that common
people don’t know...” Harry Potter looked in the direction of the Head
Table, and his voice dropped until it was almost a whisper. “I think
maybe that’s what he’s getting wrong—that he’s cynical about everything
else, but not about cynicism itself.”
Without thinking, Hermione looked in the direction of the Head Ta* 1053 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

ble herself, but the Defense Professor’s seat was still empty, as it had been
on Monday and Tuesday; the Deputy Headmistress had pronounced,
earlier, that Professor Quirrell’s classes for today would be canceled.
Afterward, when Harry had eaten a few bites of treacle tart and
then left the table, Hermione looked at Anthony and Padma, who had
been coincidentally eating nearby but certainly not eavesdropping or
anything.
Anthony and Padma looked back at her.
Padma said hesitantly, “Is it just me, or has Harry Potter started talking like a more complicated sort of book in the last few days? I mean, I
haven’t been listening to him very long—”
“It’s not just you,” said Anthony.
Hermione didn’t say anything, but she was becoming increasingly
worried. Whatever had happened to Harry Potter on the day of the
phoenix, it had changed him; there was something new in him now.
Not cold, but hard. Sometimes she caught him staring out a window at
nothing visible, a look of grim determination on his face. In Herbology
class on Monday, a Venus Fire Trap had gone out of control; and Harry
had tackled Terry out of the way of a ﬁreball even as Professor Sprout
had shouted a Flame-Freezing Charm; and when Harry had risen from
the ﬂoor he’d just gone back to his place like nothing interesting had
happened. And when for once she’d gotten a better test score than Harry
in their Transﬁguration exam, later that same Monday, Harry had smiled
at her as though to congratulate her, instead of gritting his teeth; and...
that had bothered her a lot.
She was getting the sense that Harry...
...was pulling away from her...
“He seems a lot older all of a sudden,” said Anthony. “Not like a real
grownup, I can’t imagine Harry as a grownup, but it’s like he suddenly
turned into a fourth-year version of... of whatever he is.”
“Well,” Padma said. She daintily dabbed a chocolate-ﬂavored scone
with some scone-ﬂavored frosting. “I think Dragon and Sunshine had
better ally during the next battle or Mr. Harry Potter is going to smash
us. We were allied last time, and even then Chaos almost won—”
“Yeah,” said Anthony. “You’re right, Miss Patil. Tell the Dragon
* 1054 *

**
*

CONTAGIOUS LIES

*
*

*

General that we want to meet with you—”
“No!” said Hermione. “We shouldn’t have to gang up on General
Potter just to stand a chance. That doesn’t make sense, especially now
that nobody can use Muggle things anymore. It’s still twenty-four soldiers in every army.”
Neither Padma or Anthony said anything to that.

**
*
Knock-knock, knock-knock.
“Come in, Mr. Potter,” she said.
The door creaked open, and Harry Potter slipped through the opening into her oﬃce; he pushed the door shut behind him with one hand,
and wordlessly seated himself in the cushioned chair that now stood in
front of her desk. She’d Transﬁgured that chair so often that it sometimes changed form to reﬂect her mood, without any wand movement
or incantation or even conscious intent. Right now, that chair had become deeply cushioned, so that as Harry sat down he sank into it, as
though the chair were hugging him.
Harry didn’t seem to notice. There was an air of quiet determination
about the boy; his eyes had locked steadily with hers, and not let up for
a moment. “You called me?” said the boy.
“I did,” said Professor McGonagall. “I have two pieces of good news
for you, Mr. Potter. First—have you met Mr. Rubeus Hagrid, at all? The
groundskeeper? He was an old friend of your parents.”
Harry hesitated. Then, “Mr. Hagrid spoke to me a bit after I got
here,” Harry said. “I think it was on Tuesday of my ﬁrst week of school.
He didn’t say he knew my parents, though. At the time I thought he just
wanted to introduce himself to the Boy-Who-Lived... did he have some
kind of hidden agenda? He didn’t seem like the type...”
“Ah...” she said. It took her a moment to pull her thoughts together.
“It’s a long story, Mr. Potter, but Mr. Hagrid was falsely accused of murdering a student, ﬁve decades ago. Mr. Hagrid’s wand was snapped, and
* 1055 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

he was expelled. Later, when Professor Dumbledore became Headmaster, he gave Mr. Hagrid a place here as Keeper of Grounds and Keys.”
Harry’s eyes watched her intently. “You said that ﬁve decades ago
was the last time a student died in Hogwarts, and you were certain that
ﬁve decades ago was the last time someone heard the Sorting Hat’s secret
message.”
She felt a slight chill—even the Headmaster or Severus might not
have made that connection that quickly—and said, “Yes, Mr. Potter.
Someone opened the Chamber of Secrets, but this was not believed, and
Mr. Hagrid was blamed for the resulting death. However, the Headmaster has located the additional enchantment on the Sorting Hat, and he
has shown it to a special panel of the Wizengamot. As a result, Mr. Hagrid’s sentence has been revoked—just this morning, in fact—and he will
be allowed to acquire a new wand.” She hesitated. “We... have not yet
told Mr. Hagrid of this, Mr. Potter. We were waiting until the deed was
done, so as not to give him false hope after so long. Mr. Potter... we
were wondering if we could tell Mr. Hagrid that it was you who helped
him...?”
She saw the weighing look in his eyes—
“I remember Mr. Hagrid holding you when you were a baby,” she
said. “I think he would be very happy to know.”
She could see it, though, on Harry’s face, the moment when he decided that Rubeus wouldn’t be any use to him.
Harry shook his head. “Bad enough that someone might deduce
there was a Parselmouth in this year’s crop of students,” Harry said. “I
think it’d be more prudent to just keep it all as secret as possible.”
She remembered James and Lily, who’d never hesitated to return the
friendship the huge, bluﬀ man had oﬀered them, for all that James was
the scion of a Noble House or Lily a budding Charms Mistress, and
Rubeus a mere half-giant whose wand had been snapped...
“Because you don’t expect him to prove useful, Mr. Potter?”
There was silence. She hadn’t intended to say that out loud.
Sadness crossed Harry’s face. “Probably,” Harry said quietly. “But I
don’t think he and I would get along, do you?”
Something seemed to be stuck in her throat.
* 1056 *

**
*

CONTAGIOUS LIES

*
*

*

“Speaking of making use of people,” Harry said. “It seems I’m going
to be thrown into a war with a Dark Lord sometime soon. So while I’m
in your oﬃce, I’d like to ask that my sleep cycle be extended to thirty
hours per day. Neville Longbottom wants to start practicing dueling,
there’s an older Huﬄepuﬀ who oﬀered to teach him, and they invited
me to join. Plus there’s other things I want to learn too—and if you or
the Headmaster think I should study anything in particular, in order to
become a powerful wizard when I grow up, let me know. Please direct
Madam Pomfrey to administer the appropriate potion, or whatever it is
that she needs to do—”
“Mr. Potter!”
Harry’s eyes gazed directly into her own. “Yes, Minerva? I know it
wasn’t your idea, but I’d like to survive the use the Headmaster’s making
of me. Please don’t be an obstacle to that.”
It almost broke her. “Harry,” she whispered in a bare voice, “children
shouldn’t have to think like that!”
“You’re right, they shouldn’t,” Harry said. “A lot of children have
to grow up too early, though, not just me; and most children like that
would probably trade places with me in ﬁve seconds. I’m not going to
pity myself, Professor McGonagall, not when there are people out there
in real trouble and I’m not one of them.”
She swallowed, hard, and said, “Mr. Potter, at thirty hours per day,
you’ll—get older, you’ll age faster—” Like Albus.
“And in my ﬁfth year I’ll be around the same physiological age as
Hermione,” said Harry. “Doesn’t seem that terrible.” There was a wry
smile now on Harry’s face. “Honestly, I’d probably want this even if
there weren’t a Dark Lord. Wizards live for a while, and either wizards or
Muggles will probably push that out even further over the next century.
There’s no reason not to pack as many hours into a day as I can. I’ve got
things I plan to do, and ’twere well they were done quickly.”
There was a long pause.
“All right,” Minerva said. It came out as almost a whisper. She raised
her voice. “All right, Mr. Potter, I shall ask the Headmaster, and if he
agrees, it shall be done.”
Harry’s eyes narrowed for a moment. “I see. Then please remind
* 1057 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

the Headmaster that Godric Gryﬃndor, in his last words, said that if it
had been the right thing for him to do, then he wouldn’t tell anyone else
to choose wrongly, not even the youngest student in Hogwarts.”
And she knew with a hollow feeling that any chance of Albus stopping this, stopping any of this, had just Vanished into nothingness. That
was what Albus had told her when she’d objected that Cameron Edward was too young, and then when she’d objected that Peter Pevensie
was too young, and ﬁnally she’d given up objecting. “Who told you that,
Mr. Potter?” Not Albus—surely Albus would never say that to any student—
“I’ve been doing a lot of reading lately,” Harry said. His body started
to rise from the enveloping chair, then halted. “Dare I ask about the
second piece of good news?”
“Oh,” she said. “Ah—Professor Quirrell has woken up and says that
you may—”

**
*
The Hogwarts inﬁrmary was a brilliantly open space, skylit on all four
sides despite seeming to be located squarely in the middle of the castle.
White beds in long rows stretched out, only three of them occupied at
the moment. One older boy and one older girl on opposite sides, both
lying motionless with their eyes closed, probably unconscious and spellbound while some healing Charm or Potion reconﬁgured their bodies
in uncomfortable ways; and the third occupant had the curtain drawn
around their bed, which was presumably a good thing. Madam Pomfrey
had pushed him along with a hard shove and told him not to gawk, and
Harry had needed to remind himself sharply that some people still didn’t
know who the Boy-Who-Lived was—either that, or Madam Pomfrey’s
identity was bound up with her absolute dominance of her own hospital,
etcetera, whatever.
Behind the rows of beds were ﬁve doors, leading into the private
rooms where they stored the patients who would be staying for days
instead of hours, but whose condition didn’t warrant a transfer to
St. Mungo’s.
* 1058 *

**
*

CONTAGIOUS LIES

*
*

*

Windowless, skyless, unlit but for a single smokeless torch on one of
the solid stone walls; that was the room behind the middle door. Harry
had wondered whether professors could ask Hogwarts to change itself;
or if the inﬁrmary always had a room like that available, for people who
didn’t enjoy the light.
In the center of the room, between two equal bedstands that looked
to have been carved from the same grey marble as the walls, rested a
white hospital bed, looking vaguely orangish in the unsmoking torchlight; and within that bed, a white sheet pulled up about his thighs and
wearing a hospital gown, sat Professor Quirrell with his back slightly
propped up against the headboard of the bed.
There was something frightening about seeing Professor Quirrell in
one of Madam Pomfrey’s beds, even if the Defense Professor appeared
uninjured. Even knowing that Professor Quirrell had deliberately arranged his own apparent defeat at Severus’s hands, to give himself an
excuse to recover his strength from Azkaban. Harry had never actually
watched anyone dying in a hospital bed, but he’d seen too many movies.
It was an intimation of mortality, and the Defense Professor was not
supposed to be mortal.
Madam Pomfrey had told Harry that he was absolutely forbidden to
pester her patient.
Harry had said, “I understand”, which technically did not say anything about obedience.
The stern old healer had then turned, and started to say to Professor Quirrell that he was absolutely not to overexert himself or... upset
himself...
Madam Pomfrey had trailed oﬀ, hurriedly turned around, and ﬂed
the room.
“Not bad,” Harry observed, after the door had shut behind the escaping medical matron. “I’ve got to learn how to do that, sometime.”
Professor Quirrell smiled a smile with absolutely no humor content,
and said, his voice sounding a good deal dryer than its usual dryness,
“Thank you for your artistic critique, Mr. Potter.”
Harry stared into the pale blue eyes, and thought that Professor
Quirrell looked...
* 1059 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

...older.
It was subtle, it might have just been Harry’s imagination, it might
have been the poor lighting. But the hair above Quirinus Quirrell’s forehead might have receded a bit, what remained might have thinned and
greyed, an advancing of the baldness that had already been visible on the
back of his head. The face might have grown a little sunken.
The pale blue eyes had stayed sharp and intense.
“I am glad,” Harry said quietly, “to see you in what appears to be
good health.”
“Appearances can be deceiving, of course,” said Professor Quirrell.
He gave a ﬂick of his ﬁngers, and when his hand ﬁnished the gesture he
was holding his wand. “Would you believe that woman thinks she has
conﬁscated this from me?”
Six incantations the Defense Professor spoke then; six of the thirty
that he had used to safeguard their important conversations in Mary’s
Room.
Harry raised his eyebrows, silently quizzical.
“That is all I can manage for now,” said the Defense Professor. “I
expect it shall prove suﬃcient. Still, there is a proverb: If you do not
wish a thing heard, do not say it. Consider it to apply in full measure. I
am told that you were trying to see me?”
“Yes,” Harry said. He paused, gathered his thoughts. “Did the Headmaster, or anyone, tell you that we can’t go to lunch any more?”
“Something along those lines,” said the Defense Professor. And without changing expression, “Of course I was terribly sorry to hear it.”
“It’s more extreme than that, actually,” said Harry. “I’m conﬁned to
Hogwarts and its grounds indeﬁnitely. I can’t leave without a guard and
a good reason. I’m not going home for summer, and maybe not ever
again. I was hoping... to speak with you, about that.”
There was a pause.
The Defense Professor exhaled a breath like a brief sigh, and said, “We
shall just have to rely on the known fact that the Deputy Headmistress
will personally murder anyone who tries to report me. Mr. Potter, I
intend to keep this conversation on track so that we may conclude it
quickly, is that understood?”
* 1060 *

**
*

CONTAGIOUS LIES

*
*

*

Harry nodded, and—
In the light of the single torch, shaded toward the reddish end of the
optical spectrum, the snake’s green scales were not very reﬂective, and
the blue-and-white banding hardly more so. Dark seemed the snake,
in that light. The eyes, which had seemed like gray pits before, now
reﬂected the torchlight, and seemed brighter than the rest of the snake.
“Sso,” hissed the venomous creature. “What did you wissh to ssay?”
And Harry hissed, “Sschoolmasster thinkss that woman’ss former Lord
iss the one who sstole her from prisson.”
Harry had thought about it this time, and carefully, before he had
decided that he would reveal to Professor Quirrell only that the Headmaster believed that; and not say anything about the prophecy which
had set Voldemort on Harry’s parents, nor that the Headmaster was reconstituting the Order of the Phoenix... it was a risk, a signiﬁcant risk,
but Harry needed an ally in this.
“He believess that one iss alive?” the snake ﬁnally said. The divided,
two-pronged tongue ﬂickered rapidly from side to side, sardonic snakish
laughter. “Ssomehow I am not ssurprissed.”
“Yess,” Harry hissed dryly, “very amussing, I am ssure. Except now am
sstuck in Hogwartss for next ssix years, for ssafety! I have decided that I will,
indeed, sseek power; and conﬁnement iss not helpful for that. Musst convince
sschoolmasster that Dark Lord iss not yet awakened, that esscape was work
of ssome other power—”
Again the rapid ﬂickering of the snake’s tongue; the snakish laughter
was stronger, dryer, this time. “Amateur foolisshnesss.”
“Pardon?” hissed Harry.
“You ssee misstake, think of undoing, ssetting time back to sstart. Yet
not even with hourglasss can time be undone. Musst move forward insstead.
You think of convincing otherss they are misstaken. Far eassier to convince
them they are right. Sso conssider, boy: what new happensstance would
make schoolmasster decide you were ssafe once more, ssimultaneoussly advance your other agendass?”
Harry stared at the snake, puzzled. His mind tried to comprehend
and unravel the riddle—
“Iss it not obviouss?” hissed the snake. Again the tongue ﬂickered
*

1061 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

sardonic laughter. “To free yoursself, to gain power in Britain, you musst
again be sseen to defeat the Dark Lord.”

**
*
In reddish-orange ﬂickering torchlight, a green snake swayed above a
white hospital bed, as the boy stared into the embers of its eyes.
“Sso,” Harry said ﬁnally. “Let uss be clear on what iss propossed. You
ssuggesst that we sset up imposstor to imperssonate Dark Lord.”
“Ssomething like that. Woman we resscued will cooperate, sshould be
mosst convincing when sshe iss sseen at hiss sside.” More sardonic tongueﬂickering. “You are kidnapped from Hogwartss to public location, many
witnesssess, wardss keep out protectorss. Dark Lord announcess that he hass
at long lasst regained physical form, after wandering as sspirit for yearss;
ssayss that he hass gained sstill greater power, not even you can sstop him
now. Oﬀerss to let you duel. You casst guardian Charm, Dark Lord laughss
at you, ssayss he iss not life-eater. Casstss Killing Cursse at you, you block,
watcherss ssee Dark Lord explode—”
“Casst Killing Cursse?” Harry hissed in incredulity. “At me? Again?
Ssecond time? Nobody will believe Dark Lord could posssibly be that
sstupid—”
“You and I are only two people in country who would notice that,” hissed
the snake. “Trusst me on thiss, boy.”
“What if there iss third, ssomeday?”
The snake swayed thoughtfully. “Could write diﬀerent sscript for play,
if you wissh. Whatever sscenario, sshould leave open posssibility Dark Lord
might return yet again—nation musst think they are sstill dependent on you
to protect them.”
Harry stared into the red-ﬂickering pits of the snake’s eyes.
“Well?” hissed the swaying form.
The obvious thought was that going along with the Defense Professor’s plots and deceptions a second time, spinning an even more complicated lie to cover up the ﬁrst mistake, and creating another fatal vulnerability if anyone ever discovered the truth, would be exactly the same sort
* 1062 *

**
*

CONTAGIOUS LIES

*
*

*

of stupidity as the putative Dark Lord using the Killing Curse again. It
didn’t even take his Huﬄepuﬀ side to point that out, Harry thought it
in his very own mental voice.
But there was also a certain question as to whether the appropriate
moral to learn from the last experience was to always say no immediately
to the Defense Professor, or...
“Will think about it,” hissed Harry. “Will not ansswer right away, thiss
time, will enumerate risskss and beneﬁtss ﬁrsst—”
“Undersstood,” hissed the snake. “But remember thiss, boy, other
eventss proceed without you. Hessitation iss alwayss eassy, rarely usseful.”

**
*
The boy emerged from the private room into the main inﬁrmary, running nervous ﬁngers through his messy black hair as he walked past the
white beds, occupied and unoccupied.
Shortly afterward, the boy emerged from the Hogwarts inﬁrmary
entirely, passing Madam Pomfrey on the way out with a distracted nod.
The boy walked out into a hallway, then into a larger corridor, and
then stopped and leaned against the wall.
The thing was...
...he really didn’t want to be stuck in Hogwarts for the next six years;
and when you thought about it...
...the Incident with Rescuing Bellatrix From Azkaban wasn’t just imposing costs on Harry. Other people would be worrying, living in fear
of the Dark Lord’s return, expending unknown resources to take unknown precautions. Harry could demand that they write the script in
such fashion as to make it seem not plausible that the Dark Lord would
return a third time. And then people would relax, it would all be over.
Unless of course there actually was a Dark Lord out there to be
feared. There had been a prophecy.
The boy leaning against the wall vented a soft sigh, and started walking again.
* 1063 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

Harry had almost forgotten, but he had gotten around to showing
Professor Quirrell the deck of cards he’d been given on Sunday night by
‘Santa Claus’, within which the King of Hearts was allegedly a portkey
that would take him to the Salem Witches’ Institute in America. Although of course Harry hadn’t told Professor Quirrell who’d sent him
the card, nor what it was supposed to do, before he’d asked Professor
Quirrell if it was possible to tell where the portkey would send him.
The Defense Professor had transformed back to human form, and
examined the King of Hearts, tapping it a few times with his wand.
And according to Professor Quirrell...
...the portkey would send the user somewhere in London, but he
couldn’t pinpoint it any nearer than that.
Harry had shown Professor Quirrell the note that had accompanied
the deck of cards, saying nothing of the earlier notes.
Professor Quirrell had taken it in at a glance, given a dry chuckle,
and observed that if you read the note carefully, it did not explicitly say
that the portkey would take him to the Salem Witches’ Institute.
You needed to learn to pay attention to that kind of subtlety, Professor Quirrell said, if you wanted to be a powerful wizard when you grew
up; or, indeed, if you wanted to grow up at all.
The boy sighed again as he trudged oﬀ to class.
He was starting to wonder if all the other wizarding schools were
also like this, or if it was only Hogwarts that had a problem.

* 1064 *

CHAPTER

SIXT Y-SIX

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
PART I
essitation iss alwayss eassy, rarely usseful.
So the Defense Professor had told him; and while you could
quibble about the details of the proverb, Harry understood the weaknesses of Ravenclaws well enough to know that you had to try answering
your own quibbles. Did some plans call for waiting? Yes, many plans
called for delayed action; but that was not the same as hesitating to choose.
Not delaying because you knew the right moment to do what was necessary, but delaying because you couldn’t make up your mind—there was
no cunning plan which called for that.
Did you sometimes need more information to choose? Yes, but that
could also turn into an excuse for delaying; and it would be tempting to
delay, when you were faced with a choice between two painful alternatives, and not choosing would avoid the mental pain for a time. So you
would pick a piece of information you couldn’t easily obtain, and claim
that you couldn’t possibly decide without it; that would be your excuse.
Although if you knew what information you needed, knew when and
how you would obtain that information, and knew what you would do
depending on each possible observation, then that was less suspicious as
an excuse for hesitating.
If you weren’t just hesitating, you ought to be able to choose in
advance what you would do, once you had the extra information you
claimed you needed.

H

* 1065 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-SIX

*
*

*

If the Dark Lord were really out there, would it be smart to go along
with Professor Quirrell’s plan to have someone impersonate the Dark
Lord?
No. Deﬁnitely no. Absolutely not.
And if Harry knew for a fact that the Dark Lord wasn’t really out
there... in that case...
The Defense Professor’s oﬃce was a small room, at least today; it
had changed since the last time Harry had seen it, the stone of the room
becoming darker, more polished. Behind the Defense Professor’s desk
stood the single empty bookcase that always decorated the room, a tall
bookcase stretching almost from the ﬂoor to the ceiling, with seven
empty wooden shelves. Harry had only once seen Professor Quirrell
take a book from those empty shelves, and never seen him put a book
back.
The green snake swayed above the seat of the chair behind the Defense Professor’s desk, the lidless eyes staring unblinking at Harry from
close to his own eye level.
They were warded now by twenty-two spells, all that could be cast
within Hogwarts without attracting the Headmaster’s attention.
“No,” hissed Harry.
The green snake cocked its head, tilting it slightly; no emotion was
conveyed by the gesture, not that Harry’s Parselmouth talent conveyed
to him. “Reasson not?” said the green snake.
“Too rissky,” Harry said simply. That was true whether or not the
Dark Lord was out there. Forcing himself to decide in advance had made
him realize that he’d just been using the unanswered question as an excuse to hesitate; the sane decision was the same, either way.
For a moment the dark pitted eyes seemed to gleam blackly, for a
moment the scaled mouth gaped to expose the fangs. “Think you have
learned wrong lessson, boy, from previouss failure. My planss are not in
habit of failing, and lasst one would have gone ﬂawlesssly, but for your own
foolisshnesss. Correct lessson iss to follow ssteps laid down for you by older
and wisser Sslytherin, tame your wild impulssess.”
“Lessson I learned is not to try plotss that would make girl-child friend
think I am evil or boy-child friend think I am sstupid,” Harry snapped
* 1066 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION I

*
*

*

back. He’d been planning a more temporizing response than that, but
somehow the words had just slipped out.
The sssss-ing sound that came from the snake was not heard by Harry
as words, only as pure fury. A moment later, “You told them—”
“Of coursse not! But know what they would ssay.”
There was a long pause as the snake-head swayed, staring at Harry;
again no detectable emotion came through, and Harry wondered what
Professor Quirrell could be thinking that would take Professor Quirrell
that long to think.
“You sserioussly care what thosse two think?” came the snake’s ﬁnal
hiss. “True younglingss thosse two are, not like you. Could not weigh adult
matterss.”
“Might have done better than me,” Harry hissed. “Boy-child friend
would have assked after ssecret motivess before asssenting to resscue
woman—”
“Glad you undersstand that now,” the snake hissed coldly. “Alwayss
assk after other’ss advantage. Next learn to alwayss assk after your own. If
my plan iss not to your tasste, what iss yours?”
“If necesssary—sstay at sschool ssix yearss and sstudy. Hogwartss sseemss
ﬁne place to dwell. Bookss, friendss, sstrange but tassty food.” Harry wanted
to chuckle, but there wasn’t any gesture in Parseltongue for the kind of
laughter he wanted to express.
The pits of the snake’s eyes seemed almost black. “Eassy to ssay that
now. Ssuch as you and I, we do not tolerate imprissonment. You will losse
patience long before sseventh year, perhapss before end of thiss one. I sshall
plan accordingly.”
And before Harry could hiss another word of Parseltongue, the
human-shape of Professor Quirrell was sitting in his chair once more.
“So, Mr. Potter,” said the Defense Professor, his voice as calm as if they
had been discussing nothing important, as if the whole conversation had
not occurred at all, “I hear that you have begun to practice dueling. Not
the worthless sort with rules, I hope?”

**
*
* 1067 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-SIX

*
*

*

Hannah Abbott looked as unnerved as Hermione had ever seen her (except on the day of the phoenix, the day Bellatrix Black had escaped,
which shouldn’t ought to count for anyone). The Huﬄepuﬀ girl had
come over to the Ravenclaw table during dinner, and tapped Hermione
on her shoulder, and very nearly dragged her away—
“Neville and Harry Potter are learning dueling from Mr. Diggory!”
Hannah blurted as soon as they were a few steps away from the table.
“Who?” said Hermione.
“Cedric Diggory!” said Hannah. “He’s the Captain of our Quidditch
Team, and general of an army, and he’s taking all the electives and getting
better grades than anyone, and I hear he learns dueling from professional
tutors during the summers, and he once beat two seventh-year students,
and even some teachers call him the Super Huﬄepuﬀ, and Professor
Sprout says we should all emu, uh, emudate him or something like that,
and—”
After Hannah ﬁnally stopped for air (the list had gone on for a while),
Hermione managed to insert a word in edgewise.
“Sunshine Soldier Abbott!” said Hermione. “Calm down. We’re not
going to be ﬁghting General Diggory, right? Sure, Neville’s studying to
beat us, but we can study too—”
“Don’t you see?” Hannah shrieked, raising her voice a lot louder then
it should’ve been, if they were trying to keep the conversation private
from all the Ravenclaws looking at them. “Neville isn’t studying to beat
us! He’s practicing so he can ﬁght Bellatrix Black! They’re going to go
through us like a Bludger through a stack of pancakes!”
The Sunshine General gave her soldier a look. “Listen,” said Hermione, “I don’t think a few weeks of practice is going to make anyone
an invincible ﬁghter. Plus we already know how to handle invincible
ﬁghters. We’ll concentrate ﬁre on them and they’ll go down just like
Draco.”
The Huﬄepuﬀ girl was looking at her with mixed admiration and
skepticism. “Aren’t you even, you know, worried?”
“Oh, honestly!” said Hermione. Sometimes it was hard being the only
sensible person in your whole school year. “Haven’t you ever heard the
saying, the only thing we have to fear is fear itself?”
* 1068 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION I

*
*

*

“What?” said Hannah. “That’s crazy, what about Lethifolds lurking
in the darkness, and being put under the Imperius Curse, and horrible
Transﬁguration accidents and—”
“I mean,” said Hermione, exasperation leaking out into her nowraised voice, she’d been hearing this sort of thing all week now, “how
about if we wait until after the Chaos Legion actually crushes us to get
so scared of them and did you just mutter ‘Gryﬃndors’ under your voice?”
A few moments later, Hermione was walking back to her place at
the table with a sweet smile plastered onto her young face, it wasn’t the
terrible cold glare of Harry’s dark side but it was the scariest face she
knew how to make.
Harry Potter was going down.

**
*
“This is loony,” gasped Neville, with what tiny amount of breath he
could spare from being completely out of breath.
“This is brilliant!” said Cedric Diggory. The eyes of the Super Hufﬂepuﬀ gleamed with manic enthusiasm, shining like the sweat on his
forehead as he stamped his feet through the dance of one of his dueling
postures. His usually-light steps had changed to heavier stomps, which
might have had something to do with the Transﬁgured metal weights
they’d all attached to their arms and legs and strapped over their chests.
“Where do you get these ideas, Mr. Potter?”
“A strange old shop... in Oxford... and I’m never... shopping there...
again.” Thud.

* 1069 *

CHAPTER

SIXT Y-SE V EN

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
PART II
n the high reaches of Hogwarts where rooms and corridors changed
on a daily basis, where the territory itself was uncertain and not just
the map, where the stability of the castle began to fray into dreams and
chaos without changing its architectural style or apparent solidity—in
the high reaches of Hogwarts, a battle would soon be fought.
The presence of so many students would stabilize the corridors for
a time, by dint of constant observation. The rooms and corridors of
Hogwarts sometimes moved even while people looked directly at them,
but they wouldn’t change. Even after eight centuries, Hogwarts was still
a little shy about changing in front of people.
But despite that transient permanence (the Defense Professor had
said) the upper reaches of Hogwarts still had a military realism: you had
to learn the ground anew each time, and check every closet for secret
corridors all over again.
Sunday it was, Sunday the ﬁrst of March. Professor Quirrell had recovered enough to supervise battles once more, and they were all catching up on the backlog.
The Dragon General, Draco Malfoy, watched two compasses he held
in either hand. One compass was the color of the Sun, the other had a
multicolored, iridescent sheen to indicate Chaos. The other two generals, Draco knew, had been given their own compasses; only Hermione
Granger’s hand, and Harry Potter’s hand, would hold a compass that
was orange-red and ﬂickered in its reﬂections like ﬁre, pointing always
to the direction of the largest active contingent of Dragon Army.

I

*

1071 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

Without those compasses they might have searched for days and
never found each other, which was a territorial hazard of ﬁghting in the
upper levels of Hogwarts.
Draco had a bad feeling about what would happen when Dragon
Army found the Chaos Legion. Harry Potter had changed since Bellatrix Black had escaped; the Heir of Slytherin had begun to seem truly
Lordly now (and how had Professor Quirrell known that would happen?) Draco would have felt a lot better with Hermione Granger standing alongside him with her twenty-three Sunshine Soldiers in tow, but
no, the Sunshine General was being stupidly proud and refusing to accept aid against General Potter. She wanted to take down Potter herself,
she’d told him.
The Noble and Most Ancient House of Malfoy had maintained their
inﬂuence over Britain for centuries by understanding that you couldn’t
always be the most powerful. Sometimes another Lord was just stronger,
and you had to settle for merely being his foremost lieutenant. You could
build up quite a position of wealth and power over a dozen generations
of being second in command. You just had to be careful, each time,
not to let your House be dragged down with the fall of the Lord you
served. That was the Malfoy tradition which centuries of experience
had honed...
And so Father had thoroughly explained to Draco that if he ran into
someone who was obviously stronger than him, Draco was not to resent
this and not to deny it and not to throw a tantrum that could sabotage
his potential position, but Draco was to make sure that his place in the
next generation’s power structure wasn’t any lower than second.
Granger, apparently, had never gotten this lecture from her own parents, and was still in denial about the obvious fact that Harry Potter was
becoming stronger than her.
So Draco had secretly met with Captain Goldstein and Captain
Bones and Captain Macmillan and they’d agreed to all do their best to
make sure that Dragon and Sunshine didn’t engage each other before
they engaged the larger threat of Chaos.
It wasn’t really violating the agreement against traitors, you weren’t
soliciting traitors if you honestly meant to help the other army.
* 1072 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION II

*
*

*

A high ringing tone belled through the corridors to signal the start
of the battle, and a moment later Draco shouted “Go!” and the Dragons
started running. It would tire his soldiers, it would cost them something
even after they stopped and caught their breath, but they had to put
Chaos directly between themselves and the Sunshine Regiment.

**
*
Harry and Neville walked at a leisurely pace through the corridors,
Harry watching the yellow-golden compass that pointed toward the location of the Sunshine Regiment, and Neville keeping a lookout just in
case they ran into someone else.
Their footsteps sounded a bit thumpy, if you listened closely.
“So,” the Chaotic Lieutenant said after a while. “That’s why you had
us practice dueling with all that weight strapped on?”
Harry nodded, keeping his eyes on the compass that led to Sunshine;
if the apparent direction started to change quickly then they were getting
close.
“I didn’t want to say anything in front of the others, but a couple of
weeks isn’t a lot of time to put on extra muscle,” said Neville. “And the
balance is diﬀerent, and I think this weighs more actually, and doesn’t
this count as Transﬁguring a Muggle artifact?”
“Nope,” Harry said. “I checked that in advance. You can see it in
Hogwarts statues, so some wizards used to wear it, even if they were just
being fashionable for the Dark Ages.” And since nobody would ever try
this if they weren’t ﬁghting ﬁrst-year students using weak spells like the
Sleep Hex, it didn’t count as giving away good ideas, either.
They came to a Y-intersection, an annoying one; neither corridor
bent in quite the right way to take them on a direct intercept course
toward where Sunshine would go as they followed the Chaos Legion
following Dragon Army. So Harry chose what seemed like the better of
the two options, and Neville followed.
“We’d better try a quick Silencing Charm on this stuﬀ when we get
close,” Neville said. “It’s kind of noisy, they might ﬁgure it out.”
* 1073 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

Harry nodded, and then said “Good idea” in case Neville hadn’t been
looking at him.
They trudged on through the stone-ﬂoored corridor of the upper
reach of Hogwarts, lit by windows of plain glass or stained glass, now
and then passing statues of witches and dragons and even the occasional
wizard-knight in plate armor or chainmail.

**
*
The Sunshine Soldiers were striding through a long, wide corridor with
their wands out and pointed. They couldn’t use the Prismatic Shield
while they were maneuvering, but Parvati Patil and Jenny Rustad were
currently maintaining Contegos around the oﬃcer group, who would be
the ﬁrst targets of any ambush.
Their tactic for the next battle, she and her oﬃcers had decided,
would be to mix directly in with the enemy soldiers as fast as possible—
after having practiced among themselves how to support one another,
avoid hitting each other, and get into positions where enemy soldiers
would hesitate to ﬁre. They’d only gotten in four hours practice, but
she thought her troops would already be better at that kind of mixed-in
ﬁghting than soldiers who hadn’t practiced at all. It seemed like the sort
of tactic Chaos would use, but they hadn’t actually used it yet.
It was a good strategy, she believed. And yet still, no matter how
much she’d lectured her soldiers, they’d persisted in whispering fearful
rumors about what Harry and Neville were learning to do. Finally she’d
gone oﬀ and talked with Captain Goldstein, who understood things like
Troop Morale, and Anthony had suggested—
“That’s weird,” Captain Macmillan spoke up suddenly, frowning at
the ﬁery and iridescent compasses he held in either hand. (Ernie was, as
Harry would have termed it, “good at spatial visualization”, and so had
been designated to hold both compasses and try to ﬁgure out what their
enemies were doing.) “I think... Dragon’s not moving fast anymore...
I think they got on the other side of Chaos from us ﬁrst... and it looks
* 1074 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION II

*
*

*

like Chaos is moving to attack them instead of trying to maneuver out
from in between?”
Hermione frowned, trying to understand, and she saw similar frowns
on the faces of Anthony and Ron. If Chaos and Dragon attacked each
other straight out, and spent all their forces ﬁghting each other, that was
practically conceding the battle to Sunshine...
“Potter thinks we’re allied so he’s attacking Malfoy now, before
Dragon can link up with us,” said Blaise Zabini from the common ranks
of soldiers. “Or Potter just thinks he can beat both armies in a row, if he
attacks them separately.” The Slytherin boy gave a condescending sigh.
“Are you going to promote me back to oﬃcer now? You lot are hopeless
without me, you know.”
They all ignored the talking noises coming from Zabini’s mouth.
“We still moving in the right direction?” said Anthony.
“Yeah,” said Ernie.
“We getting close to them?” said Ron.
“Not yet—”
That was when the huge black-wooden doors at the end of the corridor ﬂew open and crashed into the wall, revealing two ﬁgures almost
completely enveloped in grey cloaks, grey cloth stretched over the faces
beneath the grey hoods, one of those ﬁgures already raising a wand and
pointing it directly at her.
And then the face of the game changed drastically, as Harry’s voice,
high and strained with the eﬀort, screamed the word:
“Stupefy!”
The dueling-grade stunner blasted toward her, she was so shocked
that she didn’t start to move until almost too late, as the red jet of
light smashed right through the Contego shield to their front and she
just barely dodged, there was a tingle on her arm as the red light went
past her, and she saw out of the corner of her eye Susan getting hit and
blown oﬀ her feet into Ron—
“Somnium!” bellowed Anthony’s voice, followed a moment later by
a dozen voices crying “Somnium!”
Hermione frantically pushed herself to her feet, and as she rose, she
saw the two ﬁgures in the grey cloaks just standing there.
* 1075 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

You couldn’t see Sleep Hexes, the spell was too weak—
But there was no way they all could’ve missed.
“Stupefy!” shrieked the voice of Neville Longbottom, and another
red jet shot at her, she fell in an undigniﬁed heap as she desperately
twisted out of the way, and when she scrambled up, panting, she saw
that this time the stunbolt had gotten Ron where he’d been rising from
the ground.
“Hello there, Sunshine,” said Harry’s voice from beneath his hood.
“We’re the Grey Knights of Chaos,” said Neville’s voice.
“We’ll be your opponents for this battle,” said Harry’s voice, “while
Chaos’s other army slaughters the Dragons.”
“And by the way,” said Neville’s voice, “we’re invincible.”

**
*
The two boys in their grey cloaks and robes, grey cloth over their faces,
stood facing Sunshine’s entire army, seemingly unfazed by a dozen Sleep
Hexes.
Daphne heard a soft sigh from beside her, and when her head turned
she saw that Hannah’s lips were parted, and the Huﬄepuﬀ girl’s eyes
were huge, and she was staring at—
It would have been hard to describe the jumble of thoughts that
ﬂashed through Daphne’s mind as she realized that Hannah was staring
at Neville rather than Harry, which in turn seemed to trigger some part
of her into noticing that in point of fact Neville had been getting pretty
interesting lately as boys went, in fact right now the Last Scion of Longbottom was seeming downright cool, and something woke up inside her
and her own lips parted and everything the Lady her Mother had ever
instructed her about demure demeanors and ﬂattery and scented shampoo blew straight out of her mind so hard it should have ﬂuﬀed her
hair about her ears, because she’d watched Hermione and Harry and
she knew how she wanted her own courtship to go—
* 1076 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION II

*
*

*

Her Lady Mother had also recently instructed her on a few spells it
might be embarrassing not to know if you belonged to the Noble and
Most Ancient House of Greengrass.
Daphne’s wand swung to point to her left, and she shouted “Tonare!”
The wand went over her head, and she spoke the incantation “Ravum
Calvaria!”
And ﬁnally she grasped her wand in both hands and shrieked, “Lucis
Gladius!”
The huge magical drain almost sent her to her knees, but she bore
it, and when the blazing shape had fully formed and stabilized the drain
was a little less.
Still, she had a feeling she’d better not try to ﬁght with this for long.
That everyone was staring at her went quite without saying, and she
should have leaped forward to confront Neville with her hair billowing
around her, but it was all she could do to walk forward steadily to level
her Most Ancient Blade at Neville Longbottom. That everyone moved
aside and made way for her also went without saying.
“I hight Daphne, of the Noble and Most Ancient House of Greengrass!”
she cried. “Greengrass of Sunshine!” The dueling forms had gone completely out of her mind, she’d seen enough plays to remember death
challenges and blood challenges but she couldn’t remember at all what
was appropriate for this, so she just pointed the incandescent sword toward the object of her crush and yelled, “Let’s see what you got, Nevvy!”
Once again Harry’s voice shrieked “Stupefy!”, and later on, when she
was remembering this, she could never quite believe she’d managed to
do it, but she slashed out with her blade of light like it was a Beater’s bat,
and hit the stunbolt back at Harry who just barely managed to twist out
of the way.
“Tonare!” shouted Neville, of the Noble and Most Ancient House of
Longbottom. “Ravum Calvaria, Lucis Gladius!”

**
*

* 1077 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

For a few seconds, no one did anything but stare at Neville and Daphne
as they started whacking at each other. They were both moving slowly,
and Hermione guessed that the spell was taking a lot of strength out of
them. It wasn’t very impressive by comparison, if you were a Muggleborn and you’d watched certain movies.
But you still had to give them extra credit for using lightsabers at all.
“Point of order,” said Harry’s voice. “I know the Defense Professor
is watching, but I still have to ask, does anyone know whether they’ll
slice each other in half if they actually hit—”
“No,” Hermione said absently. This had been in one of her history
books, though she’d had no idea the magical dueling sword looked like
that. “They cast it so it’ll only stun if it touches.”
“You know that spell?”
“Oh, no, it’s the Charm of the Most Ancient Blade, it’s only legal
for Noble and Most Ancient Houses to use—”
Hermione stopped talking and looked at Harry, or Harry’s grey
hood rather.
“Well,” said Harry’s voice, “I guess I could take down the rest of the
Sunshine Regiment by myself, then.” She couldn’t see his face, but his
voice sounded like he was smiling.
“You dodged when Daphne hit your own spell back at you,” Hermione said. “So whatever you did, you’re not invincible. A Stupefy can still
get you.”
“Interesting theory,” said Harry’s voice from beneath the hood.
“Got anyone in your army who can test it?”
“I read about the Stunning Hex once,” said Hermione. “A few
months ago. I wonder if I can remember the instructions right?” Her
wand came up to point at Harry.
There was a slight pause, as nearby a boy and a girl breathing in
audible gasps slowly whacked at each other with lightsabers.
“Of course,” Harry said, leveling his own wand on her, “I can just
use Somnium on you. That’ll take a lot less eﬀort.”
New Contego shields sprung into existence in front of her, cast by
Jenny and Parvati, even as Harry spoke.
The tip of Hermione’s own wand began making small motions in
* 1078 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION II

*
*

*

the air, a diamond within a circle, a diamond within a circle, rehearsing
the gesture to match exactly what she remembered seeing in the book.
It would be a diﬃcult feat even for her, but she had to cast the spell right
on the ﬁrst try, she couldn’t aﬀord any failed castings that would sap her
energy.
“You know,” said Hermione Granger, “I understand that it’s not really your fault, but I’m getting tired of hearing people talk about the BoyWho-Lived like you’re—like you’re some kind of god or something.”
“Same here, I must say,” said Harry Potter. “It’s sad how people keep
underestimating me.”
Her wand kept rehearsing the diamond within the circle, over and
over. Harry would be recharging his own strength, she knew, even as
she practiced as much as she could before her attack. “I’m starting to
think you need taking down a peg, General Chaos.”
“You could be right,” Harry said equably. His feet began to shuﬄe
through what she recognized as a duelist’s dance. “Unfortunately there’s
nothing left that can defeat me now except another Harry Potter.”
“Let me be speciﬁc, Mr. Potter. I’m taking you down a peg.”
“You and what other army?”
“You think you’re pretty cool, don’t you,” said Hermione.
“Why, yes,” said Harry. “Yes, I do. Some might call that arrogant,
but am I supposed to be the last person in Hogwarts to notice how awesome I am?”
Hermione raised her left hand into the air, and made a ﬁst.
It was a signal. Eight designated soldiers in her army would be pointing their wands at her, and quietly casting Wingardium Leviosa.
They’d practiced this, too, once Hermione had given up on lecturing
her soldiers, and at Anthony’s suggestion, tried giving them a Sunshine
General who looked like she could defeat invincible enemies.
“You pretend you’re Superman,” said Hermione. She raised her left
ﬁst higher in the air, and the eight soldiers supporting her Hovered her
oﬀ the ground. “Well here’s Super Hermione!” Her hand pushed forward,
and as she shot rapidly through the air toward Harry, regretting only
that she couldn’t see the look on his face, her wand made a diamond
within a circle and she summoned up all the magic she could, it felt like
* 1079 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

she imagined touching a live wire would feel as the too-powerful spell
poured through her when her voice screamed “Stupefy!”
The red bolt burst from her wand, perfectly formed.
Harry dodged it.
And then, because they hadn’t practiced doing this part inside of
hallways, she crashed into a wall.

**
*
“Somnium!” shrieked Draco, and then after only a few seconds to
recharge, “Somnium, curse you!”
He knew he was hitting Theodore, the other boy wasn’t even trying
to dodge, but the scion of Nott only grinned as evilly as his father and
leveled his wand—
Draco managed to leap aside just as Theodore said “Somnium!” but
Draco was getting winded, he couldn’t keep this up, Theodore wasn’t
bothering to dodge at all while Draco had to keep moving, this was crazy.
He had enough strength now to ﬁre again, but—
Stupidity is doing the same thing and expecting a diﬀerent result, Harry
had said, this was Harry’s work somehow, it couldn’t be a Muggle artifact
anymore but Draco couldn’t ﬁgure out what it could be, and he should
be thinking of hypotheses and ways to test them but he was too busy
frantically dodging as Theodore laughed and shot another Sleep Hex at
him, Draco felt a little numbness in his side that time as he twisted,
that had been a very very near miss and ﬁnally Draco couldn’t take it
anymore, he didn’t bother working out what theory he was testing or
why as he just—
“Luminos!” shouted Draco, and Theodore was haloed in red light,
“Dulak!” and it went out again (so Theodore was still being aﬀected by
magic), “Expelliarmus!” and Theodore’s wand went ﬂying (that had been
a good spell to cast anyway now that Draco realized it) but Theodore was
rushing toward Draco with his arms outstretched to grapple so Draco
yelled “Flipendo!” and the other boy’s feet were abruptly yanked up—
* 1080 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION II

*
*

*

—and Theodore’s back hit the ground with a surprisingly loud and
metallic-sounding crash.
Draco’s vision was swimming now from casting four spells in such
fast succession, and Theodore was already scrambling to his feet, so there
wasn’t even time to think in words, but Draco still managed to say “Somnium!” and this time he aimed for Theodore’s face instead of the chest.
Theodore dodged (he dodged!) and the boy shouted “Code seven on
Malfoy!”
“Prismatis!” cried Padma’s voice and there was suddenly a shimmering rainbow wall in front of Draco, just as four Chaotic voices cried
“Somnium!”
And there was a pause, as everyone looked at the huge Prismatic
Sphere protecting the remnants of Dragon Army.
Casting that ﬁfth spell had sent Draco to his hands and knees, but
he looked up and managed to say, as clearly as he could, “If the Sleep
Hex—doesn’t work—aim for the face—I think the Lieutenants are wearing metal shirts.”
“You’ve already lost too many soldiers,” Finnigan said loudly from
across the barrier, “we’ll beat you anyway,” and then the Gryﬃndor boy
laughed evilly. He did the evil laughter almost as well as Harry Potter
by now, and the other Chaotic Legionnaires started laughing with him
soon afterward.
Draco could see from the corner of his eye where Gregory and Vincent lay unconscious. Padma was still sustaining the Prismatic Sphere,
the largest one he’d ever seen her cast; but she was breathing hard, still
visibly sweaty from when they’d all jogged to get into position, the
Ravenclaw girl was a strong witch but not an athletic one.
He really hoped General Granger got here soon and hit Chaos from
behind. General Potter and Neville of Chaos were missing, and Draco
could guess where they’d gone, but two soldiers couldn’t delay the whole
Sunshine Regiment for too long all by themselves, could they?

**
*
*

1081 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

She knew it wasn’t fair, that the other girl had given all she could, but
Hermione still wished that Daphne had lasted longer.
“Lagann!” said Neville’s voice from behind her as she ﬂew, and there
was the sound of a Prismatic Wall shattering, Hannah’s voice desperately
cried “Somnium!” and then a few moments later Neville’s voice calmly
said “Somnium” and there was the thud of another of her soldiers falling
over.
And the force keeping her in the air diminished again, Hermione
could feel the grab of the Hover Charms straining at her, but now it just
wasn’t enough.
Her ﬂight stopped and she began falling in slow motion toward the
ground, and she should’ve signaled her soldiers to just drop her, but she
was too angry and confused and not thinking fast enough and still trying to muster the strength for one last Stunning Hex, and so there was
nowhere to go when Harry pointed his wand at her and said “Somnium”
and that was the last word that Hermione Granger heard of her battle.

* 1082 *

CHAPTER

SIXT Y-EIGHT

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
PART III
ermione wasn’t feeling very nice right now, or Good either, there
was a hot ball of anger burning inside her and she wondered if this
was something like Harry’s darkness (though it probably wasn’t even
close) and she shouldn’t have felt that way over some silly little game
but—
Her whole army. Two soldiers had beaten her whole army. That was
what she’d been told after she woke up.
It was a little too much.
“Well,” Professor Quirrell said. From up close the Defense Professor
didn’t look quite as healthy as he had the last time she’d been in his oﬃce;
his skin looked paler, and he moved a little slower. His expression was as
stern as ever, and his gaze as penetrating; his ﬁngers tapped sharply on his
desk, rap-rap. “I would guess that of the three of you, only Mr. Malfoy
has guessed why I’ve asked you here.”
“Something to do with Noble and Most Ancient Houses?” said
Harry from beside her, sounding puzzled. “I didn’t violate some kind
of crazy law by ﬁring on Daphne, did I?”
“Not quite,” the man said with heavy irony. “Since Miss Greengrass
did not invoke the correct dueling forms, she is not entitled to demand
that you be stripped of your House name. Although of course I would
not have permitted a formal duel. Wars do not respect such rules.” The
Defense Professor leaned forward and rested his chin on steepled hands,
as though sitting upright had already tired him. His eyes gazed at them,
sharp and dangerous. “General Malfoy. Why did I call you here?”

H

* 1083 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

“General Potter against the two of us isn’t a fair ﬁght anymore,”
Draco Malfoy said in a quiet voice.
“What?” blurted Hermione. “We almost had them, if Daphne hadn’t
fainted—”
“Miss Greengrass did not faint from magical exhaustion,” Professor
Quirrell said dryly. “Mr. Potter shot her in the back with a Sleep Hex
while your soldiers were distracted by the sight of their general ﬂying
into a wall. But congratulations nonetheless, Miss Granger, on almost
defeating two Chaotic Legionnaires with a mere twenty-four Sunshine
Soldiers.”
The blood ﬂaming in her cheeks grew a little hotter. “That—that was
just—if I’d only ﬁgured out he was wearing armor—”
Professor Quirrell gazed at her from over touched ﬁngers. “Of course
there are ways you could have won, Miss Granger. There always are,
in every lost battle. The world around us redounds with opportunities, explodes with opportunities, which nearly all folk ignore because
it would require them to violate a habit of thought; a thousand Hufﬂepuﬀ bones waiting to be sharpened into spears. If you had thought to
try a Finite Incantatem on general principles, you would have dispelled
Mr. Potter’s suit of chainmail and everything else he was wearing except his underwear, which leads me to suspect that Mr. Potter did not
quite realize his own vulnerability. Or you could have had your soldiers
swarm Mr. Potter and Mr. Longbottom and physically wrest the wands
from their hands. Mr. Malfoy’s own response was not what I would
term well-reasoned, but at least he did not wholly ignore his thousand
alternatives.” A sardonic smile. “But you, Miss Granger, had the misfortune to remember how to cast the Stunning Hex, and so you did not
search your excellent memory for a dozen easier spells that might have
proved eﬃcacious. And you pinned all your army’s hopes on your own
person, so they lost spirit when you fell. Afterward they continued to
cast their futile Sleep Hexes, governed by the habits of ﬁghting that had
been trained into them, unable to break the pattern as Mr. Malfoy did. I
cannot quite comprehend what goes through people’s minds when they
repeat the same failed strategy over and over, but apparently it is an astonishingly rare realization that you can try something else. And so the
* 1084 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION III

*
*

*

Sunshine Regiment was wiped out by two soldiers.” The Defense Professor grinned mirthlessly. “One perceives certain similarities to how ﬁfty
Death Eaters dominated all of magical Britain, and how our much-loved
Ministry continues in its rule.”
The Defense Professor sighed. “Nonetheless, Miss Granger, the fact
remains that this is not the ﬁrst such defeat for you. In the previous
battle, you and Mr. Malfoy united your forces, and yet you were fought
to a standstill, so that you and Mr. Malfoy had to pursue Mr. Potter onto
the roof. The Chaos Legion has now demonstrated, twice in succession,
military strength equal to both other armies combined. This leaves me
no choice. General Potter, you will select eight soldiers from your army,
including at least one Chaotic Lieutenant, to be divided among Dragon
Army and the Sunshine Regiment—”
“What?” Hermione burst out again, she glanced over at the other generals and saw that Harry looked as shocked as her, while Draco Malfoy
only looked resigned.
“General Potter is stronger than both of you together,” Professor
Quirrell said with calm precision. “Your contest is over, he has won, and
it is time to rebalance the three armies to present him with a renewed
challenge.”
“Professor Quirrell!” said Harry. “I didn’t—”
“This is my decision as the Professor of Battle Magic at the Hogwarts
School of Witchcraft and Wizardry and it is not subject to negotiation.”
The words were still precise, but the look in Professor Quirrell’s eyes
chilled Hermione’s blood, even though he was glaring at Harry and not
at her. “And I ﬁnd it suspicious, Mr. Potter, that the moment you wished
to isolate Miss Granger and Mr. Malfoy and force them to chase you onto
the roof, you were able to annihilate just exactly as much of their united
force as you pleased. Indeed, that is the level of performance I expected
of you since the start of this year, and I am annoyed to discover that
you have been holding back in my classes this entire time! I have seen
what you can truly do, Mr. Potter. You are far beyond the point where
Mr. Malfoy or Miss Granger can ﬁght you on an equal level, and you
will not be permitted to pretend otherwise. This, Mr. Potter, I tell you
in my capacity as your professor: For you to learn to your full potential,
* 1085 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

you must exercise your full abilities and not hold back for any reason—
particularly not childish frets over what your friends might think!”

**
*
She left the Defense Professor’s oﬃce with a larger army, and less dignity,
and feeling a lot like a sad little bug that had just been squished, and
trying very very hard not to cry.
“I wasn’t holding back!” Harry said as soon as they turned the ﬁrst
corner away from Professor Quirrell’s oﬃce, the moment the wooden
door faded out of sight behind the stone walls. “I wasn’t pretending, I
never let either of you win!”
She didn’t answer, couldn’t answer, it would all break loose if she
tried to say a word.
“Really?” said Draco Malfoy. The Dragon General still had that air
of resignation. “Because Quirrell’s right, you know, it’s suspicious that
you could beat nearly everyone in both our armies as soon as you wanted
to make us chase you onto the roof. And didn’t you say something then,
Potter, about us needing to beat you when you were ﬁghting for real?”
The burning sensation was creeping up her throat, and when it
reached her eyes she would burst into tears, and from then on she would
be just a crying little girl to both of them.
“That—” Harry’s voice said urgently, she wasn’t looking at him but
his voice sounded like he had his head turned toward her. “That was—I
tried a lot harder that time, there was an important reason, I had to, so
I used a whole bunch of tricks I’d been saving up—and—”
She’d always been trying her hardest, every time.
“—and I, I let out a side of myself I wouldn’t usually use for something
like Defense class—”
So if she ever got close to winning against Harry when it really mattered, he could just go into his dark side and crush her, was that it?
...of course it was. She couldn’t even look Harry in the eyes when he
was being scary, how had she ever thought she could beat him for real?
* 1086 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION III

*
*

*

The corridor forked, and Harry Potter and Draco Malfoy went left
toward a staircase that climbed to the second ﬂoor, and she went right
instead, she didn’t even know where that passage went but right now
she’d rather be lost in the castle.
“Excuse me, Draco,” said Harry’s voice, and then there was a pattering of footsteps behind her.
“Leave me alone,” she said, it came out sounding stern but then she
had to shut her mouth and press her lips together tightly and hold her
breath to stop it all from coming out.
That boy just kept on coming, and ran around her and put himself
in front of her, because he was stupid that was why, and Harry said, his
voice now a high and desperate whisper, “I didn’t run away when you
were beating me in all my classes except broomstick riding!”
He didn’t understand, and he would never understand, Harry Potter would never understand, because no matter what contest he lost he
would still be the Boy-Who-Lived, if you were Harry Potter and Hermione Granger was beating you then it meant everyone was expecting
you to rise to the challenge, if you were Hermione Granger and Harry
Potter was beating you that meant you were just no one.
“It’s not fair,” she said, her voice was shaking but she wasn’t crying
yet, not yet, “I shouldn’t have to ﬁght your dark side, I’m just—I’m
only—” I’m only twelve, that was what she thought then.
“I only used my dark side once and that was—when I had to!”
“So today you beat my whole army being just Harry?” She still wasn’t
crying yet, and she wondered what her face looked like right now, if she
looked like an angry Hermione or a sad one.
“I—” Harry said. His voice got a little lower, “I wasn’t... really expecting to win, that time, I know I said I was invincible but that was just
to try to scare you, I really just thought we’d slow you down for a bit—”
She started walking again, walked right past him, and as she passed
Harry’s face tightened up like he was going to cry.
“Is Professor Quirrell right?” came a high desperate whisper from
behind her. “If I have you for a friend, will I always be afraid to do better
because I know it will hurt your feelings? That’s not fair, Hermione!”
She took a breath and held it and ran, her feet pattering across the
* 1087 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

stone as fast as they could, running as fast as she dared with her vision
all blurry, ran so that no one would hear her, and this time Harry didn’t
follow.

**
*
Minerva was going over the Transﬁguration parchment due Monday,
and had just marked down to negative two hundred points a ﬁfth-year
parchment with an error that could have potentially killed someone.
During her ﬁrst year as a professor she’d been indignant at the folly of
older students, now she was just resigned. Some people not only never
learned, they never noticed that they were hopeless, they stayed bright
and eager and kept on trying. Sometimes they believed you when you
told them, before they left Hogwarts, that they must never try anything
unusual, give up free Transﬁguration and use the art only through established Charms; and sometimes... they didn’t.
She was in the middle of trying to unravel a particularly convoluted
answer when a knock at the door disrupted her thoughts; and it wasn’t
her oﬃce hours, but it had only taken a very short time as Head of Gryfﬁndor House for her to learn to suspend judgment. You could always
deduct House points afterward.
“Come in,” she said in a crisp voice.
The young girl who entered her oﬃce had clearly been crying, and
then afterward had washed her face in hopes it wouldn’t show—
“Miss Granger!” said Professor McGonagall. It had taken her a moment to recognize that face with its eyes reddened and cheeks puﬀed.
“What happened?”
“Professor,” said the young girl in a wavering voice, “you said that if
I was ever worried or uncomfortable about anything, I should come to
you at once—”
“Yes,” said Professor McGonagall, “now what happened?”
The girl started to explain—

**
*
* 1088 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION III

*
*

*

Hermione stood still and the stairs turned around her, a revolving helix
that shouldn’t have taken her anywhere at all, and instead bore her continuously upward. Hermione thought it seemed like the Enchantment
of the Endless Stair, which had been invented in 1733 by the wizard Arram Sabeti who’d lived on top of Mount Everest in the days when no
Muggles could climb it. Only that couldn’t be right because Hogwarts
was much older—maybe the enchantment had been reinvented?
She should’ve been frightened, should’ve been nervous about her second meeting with the Headmaster.
She was, in fact, frightened and nervous about her second meeting
with the Headmaster.
Only Hermione Granger had been thinking; she’d been thinking a
lot, after she hadn’t been able to run any further and had slid down
against the wall with her lungs on ﬁre, thinking while she curled up in
a ball with her back against the chilly stone wall and her legs drawn up
and crying.
Even if she lost to Harry Potter she was never, ever going to lose to
Draco Malfoy, that was just totally absolutely unacceptable, and Professor Quirrell had praised General Malfoy for not ignoring his thousand
alternatives; and so after Hermione had cried herself out she’d thought
of fourteen other spells she should’ve tried against Harry and Neville,
and then she’d started wondering if she might be making the same sort
of mistake about other things; and that was how she’d ended up knocking on Professor McGonagall’s door. Not asking for help, right now
Hermione didn’t have any plans she could ask for help with, just telling
Professor McGonagall everything, because when she’d thought of it that
had seemed like one of the thousand alternatives that Professor Quirrell
had been talking about.
And she’d told Professor McGonagall about how Harry Potter had
changed since the day the phoenix had been on his shoulder, and about
how people more and more seemed to see her as just something of
Harry’s, and how it seemed like Harry was pulling farther and farther
away from everyone else in their school year and went around with a sad
air sometimes like he was losing something, and she didn’t know what to
do anymore.
* 1089 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

And Professor McGonagall had told her that they needed to talk to
the Headmaster.
And Hermione had felt worried, but then the thought had come
to her that Harry Potter wouldn’t have been scared of the Headmaster.
Harry Potter would have just barged ahead doing whatever he was trying
to do. Maybe (the thought had come to her) it was worth trying to be like
that, not being scared, just doing whatever, and seeing what happened to
her, it couldn’t really be worse.
The Endless Stair stopped turning.
The great oaken door in front of them with the brass griﬃn knocker
opened without being touched.
Behind a black oaken desk with dozens of drawers facing in every
direction, looking like it had drawers set inside other drawers, was the
silver-bearded Headmaster of Hogwarts upon his throne, Albus Percival
Wulfric Brian Dumbledore, into whose gently twinkling eyes Hermione
looked for around three seconds before she was distracted by all the other
things in the room.
Some time later—she wasn’t sure how long but it was while she was
trying to count the number of things in the room for the third time and
still not getting the same answer, even though her memory insisted that
nothing had been added or removed—the Headmaster cleared his throat
and said, “Miss Granger?”
Hermione’s head snapped around, and she felt a little heat in her
cheeks; but Dumbledore didn’t appear annoyed with her at all, only
serene, and with an inquiring look in those mild, half-glassed eyes.
“Hermione,” said Professor McGonagall, the older witch’s voice was
gentle and her hand rested reassuringly on Hermione’s shoulder, “please
tell the Headmaster what you said to me about Harry.”
Hermione began speaking, despite her newfound resolution her
voice still stumbled a little with nervousness, as she described how Harry
had changed in the last few weeks since Fawkes had been on his shoulder.
When she was done there was a pause, and then the Headmaster
sighed. “I am sorry, Hermione Granger,” said Dumbledore. Those blue
eyes had grown sadder as she spoke. “That is... unfortunate, but I cannot
say it is unexpected. That is a hero’s burden, which you see.”
* 1090 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION III

*
*

*

“A hero?” said Hermione. She looked up nervously at Professor
McGonagall and saw that the Transﬁguration Professor’s face had grown
tight, though her hand still squeezed Hermione’s shoulder reassuringly.
“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “I was a hero myself once, before I was a
mysterious old wizard, in the days when I opposed Grindelwald. You
have read history books, Miss Granger?”
Hermione nodded.
“Well,” said Dumbledore, “that is what heroes have to do, Miss Granger, they have their tasks and they must grow strong to accomplish them,
and that is what you see happening to Harry. If there is anything that
can be done to gentle his pathway, then you will be the one to do it,
and not I. For I am not Harry’s friend, alas, but only his mysterious old
wizard.”
“I—” said Hermione. “I’m not sure—I still want to be—” Her voice
stopped, it seemed too awful to say aloud.
Dumbledore closed his eyes, and when he opened them, he looked
a little older than before. “No one can stop you, Miss Granger, if you
choose to stop being Harry’s friend. As for what it would do to him,
you may know that better than I.”
“That—doesn’t seem fair,” Hermione said, her voice trembling.
“That I’ve got to be Harry’s friend because he’s got no one else? That
doesn’t seem fair.”
“Being a friend is not something you can be forced to, Miss Granger.”
The blue eyes seemed to look right through her. “The feelings are there,
or they are not. If they are there, you can accept them or deny them. You
are Harry’s friend—and choosing to deny it would wound him terribly,
perhaps beyond healing. But Miss Granger, what would drive you to
such extremes?”
She couldn’t ﬁnd words. She’d never been able to ﬁnd words. “If you
get too near Harry—you get swallowed up, and no one sees you any more,
you’re just something of his, everyone thinks the whole world revolves
around him and...” She didn’t have the words.
The old wizard nodded slowly. “It is indeed an unjust world we live
in, Miss Granger. All the world now knows that it is I who defeated
Grindelwald, and fewer remember Elizabeth Beckett who died opening
* 1091 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

the way so I could pass through. And yet she is remembered. Harry Potter is the hero of this play, Miss Granger; the world does revolve around
him. He is destined for great things; and I ween that in time the name
of Albus Dumbledore will be remembered as Harry Potter’s mysterious
old wizard, more than for anything else I have done. And perhaps the
name of Hermione Granger will be remembered as his companion, if
you prove worthy of it in your day. For this I tell you true: never will
you ﬁnd more glory on your own, than in Harry Potter’s company.”
Hermione shook her head rapidly. “But that’s not—” She’d known
she wouldn’t be able to explain. “It’s not about glory, it’s about being—
something that belongs to someone else!”
“So you think you would rather be the hero?” The old wizard sighed.
“Miss Granger, I have been a hero, and a leader; and I would have been a
thousand times happier if I could have belonged to someone like Harry
Potter. Someone made of sterner stuﬀ than I, to make the hard decisions,
and yet worthy to lead me. I thought, once, that I knew such a man, but
I was mistaken... Miss Granger, you have no idea at all how fortunate
are those like you, compared to heroes.”
The hot burning feeling was creeping up her throat again, along
with helplessness, she didn’t understand why Professor McGonagall had
brought her here if the Headmaster wasn’t going to help, and from a
glance at Professor McGonagall’s face, it looked like Professor McGonagall also wasn’t sure now that it had been a good idea.
“I don’t want to be a hero,” said Hermione Granger, “I don’t want
to be a hero’s companion, I just want to be me.”
(The thought came to her a few seconds later that maybe she did in
fact want to be a hero, but she decided not to change what she’d said.)
“Ah,” said the old wizard. “That is a tall order, Miss Granger.” Dumbledore rose from his throne, stepped out behind his desk, and pointed
to a symbol on the wall, so ubiquitous that Hermione’s eyes had glossed
right over it; a faded shield on which was inscribed the heraldry of Hogwarts, the lion and snake, and badger and raven, and in Latin engraved
words whose point she’d never understood. Then, as she realized where
that shield was, and how old it looked, it suddenly occurred to Hermione that this might be the original—
* 1092 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION III

*
*

*

“A Huﬄepuﬀ would say,” said Dumbledore, tapping his ﬁnger on the
faded badger and making Hermione wince for the sacrilege (if it was the
original), “that people fail to become who they are meant to be, because
they are too lazy to put in all the work involved. A Ravenclaw,” tapping
the raven, “would repeat those words that the wise know to be far older
than Socrates, know thyself, and say that people fail to become who they
are meant to be, through ignorance and lack of thought. And Salazar
Slytherin,” Dumbledore frowned as his ﬁnger tapped the faded snake,
“why, he said that we become who we are meant to be by following
our desires wherever they lead. Perhaps he would say that people fail to
become themselves because they refuse to do what is necessary to achieve
their ambitions. But then one notes that nearly all of the Dark Wizards
to come out of Hogwarts have been Slytherins. Did they become what
they were meant to be? I think not.” Dumbledore’s ﬁnger tapped the
lion, and then he turned toward her. “Tell me, Miss Granger, what would
a Gryﬃndor say? I do not need to ask whether the Sorting Hat oﬀered
you that House.”
It didn’t seem like a hard question. “A Gryﬃndor would say that
people don’t become who they should be, because they’re afraid.”
“Most people are afraid, Miss Granger,” said the old wizard. “They
live their whole lives circumscribed by crippling fear that cuts oﬀ everything they might accomplish, everything they might become. Fear of
saying or doing the wrong thing, fear of losing their mere possessions,
fear of death, and above all the fear of what other people will think of
them. Such fear is a most terrible thing, Miss Granger, and it is terribly
important to know that. But it is not what Godric Gryﬃndor would
have said. People become who they are meant to be, Miss Granger, by
doing what is right.” The old wizard’s voice was gentle. “So tell me, Miss
Granger, what seems to you like the right choice? For that is who you
truly are, and wherever that path leads, that is who you are meant to
become.”
There was a long space ﬁlled with the sounds of things that could not
be counted.
She thought about it, because she was a Ravenclaw.
“I don’t think it’s right,” Hermione said slowly, “for someone to have
* 1093 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

to live inside someone else’s shadow like that...”
“Many things in the world are not right,” said the old wizard, “the
question is what is right for you to do about them. Hermione Granger,
I shall be less subtle than is usual for a mysterious old wizard, and tell
you outright that you cannot imagine how badly things could go if the
events surrounding Harry Potter turn to ill. His quest is a matter you
would not even dream of walking away from, if you knew.”
“What quest?” said Hermione. Her voice was trembling, because it
was very clear what answer the Headmaster was looking for and she
didn’t want to give it. “What happened to Harry back then, why was
Fawkes on his shoulder?”
“He grew up,” said the old wizard. His eyes blinked several times,
beneath the half-moon glasses, and his face suddenly looked very lined.
“You see, Miss Granger, people do not grow up because of time, people grow up when they are placed in grownup situations. That is what
happened to Harry Potter that Saturday. He was told—you are not to
share this information with anyone, you understand—he was told that
he would have to ﬁght someone. I cannot tell you who. I cannot tell you
why. But that is what happened to him, and why he needs his friends.”
There was a pause.
“Bellatrix Black?” Hermione said. She couldn’t have been more
shocked if someone had plugged an electrical cord into her ear. “You’re
going to make Harry ﬁght Bellatrix Black?”
“No,” said the old wizard. “Not her. I cannot tell you who, or why.”
She thought about it some more.
“Is there any way I can keep up with Harry?” said Hermione. “I mean,
I’m not saying it’s what I’ll do, but—if he needs friends then can we be
equal friends? Can I be a hero too?”
“Ah,” said the old wizard, and smiled. “Only you can decide that,
Miss Granger.”
“But you’re not going to help me like you’re helping Harry.”
The old wizard shook his head. “I have helped him little enough,
Miss Granger. And if you are asking me for a quest—” The old wizard
smiled again, rather wryly. “Miss Granger, you are in your ﬁrst year of
Hogwarts. Do not be too eager to grow up; there will be time enough
* 1094 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION III

*
*

*

for that later.”
“I’m twelve. Harry’s eleven.”
“Harry Potter is special,” said the old wizard. “As you know, Miss
Granger.” The blue eyes were suddenly piercing beneath the half-moon
glasses, and she was reminded of the day of the Dementor when Dumbledore’s voice had said, inside her mind, that he knew about Harry’s
dark side.
Hermione put up her hand and touched Professor McGonagall’s
hand, which had stayed strong on her shoulder this whole time, and
Hermione said, she was surprised that her voice didn’t break, “I’d like
to go, now, please.”
“Of course,” said Professor McGonagall, and Hermione felt the hand
on her shoulder gently turning her around to face the oaken door.
“Have you chosen your path yet, Hermione Granger?” said Albus
Dumbledore’s voice from behind her, even as the door slowly creaked
open to reveal the Enchantment of the Endless Stair.
She nodded.
“And?”
“I’ll,” she said, her voice stuck, “I’ll, I’ll—”
She swallowed.
“I’ll do—what’s right—”
She didn’t say anything else, she couldn’t, and then the Endless Stair
began revolving around her once again.
Neither she nor Professor McGonagall spoke on the way down.
When the Flowing Stone gargoyles stepped out of their way, and
the two of them stepped out into the corridors of Hogwarts, Professor
McGonagall ﬁnally spoke, and she said in a whisper, “I’m so terribly
sorry, Miss Granger. I did not think the Headmaster would say such
things to you. I think he truly has forgotten what it is like to be a child.”
Hermione glanced back up to her and saw that Professor McGonagall
looked like she was about to burst into tears... only not really, but there
was a tightness in her face that was like that.
“If I want to be a hero too,” said Hermione, “if I’ve decided to be a
hero too, is there anything you can do to help?”
Professor McGonagall rapidly shook her head, and said, “Miss Gran* 1095 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

ger, I’m not sure the Headmaster is wrong about that. You are twelve.”
“Okay,” said Hermione.
They walked forward a bit.
“Excuse me,” said Hermione, “is it okay if I walk back to the Ravenclaw tower by myself? I’m sorry, it’s not your fault or anything, I just
want to be by myself right now.”
“Of course, Miss Granger,” said Professor McGonagall, her voice
sounding a little hoarse, and Hermione heard her footsteps stop, and
then turn around behind her.
Hermione Granger walked away.
She climbed a ﬂight of stairs, and then another, wondering if there
was anyone else in Hogwarts who would give her a chance to be a hero.
Professor Flitwick would say the same thing as Professor McGonagall,
and even if he didn’t, he probably couldn’t help, Hermione didn’t know
who could help. Well, Professor Quirrell would come up with something clever if she used up enough Quirrell points, but she had a feeling
that asking him would be a bad idea—that the Defense Professor couldn’t
help anyone become the sort of hero that was worth becoming, and that
he wouldn’t even understand the diﬀerence.
She had almost gotten to the Ravenclaw tower when she saw the ﬂash
of gold.

* 1096 *

CHAPTER

SIXT Y-NINE

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
PART I V
t was out of the corner of her eye that Hermione Granger saw it, a
reﬂection on the polished metal of a statue at the junction of two
corridors, a ﬂash of gold, a ﬂash of red, something like an image of ﬁre;
just for a moment she saw it, and then it was gone.
She paused, puzzled, and she almost walked away, but there had been
something familiar about that brief glow—
Hermione walked forward to where the statue had stood, looked
at the corridor from which she thought the ﬁery reﬂection might have
come.
Faintly, as though from a faraway place, she heard the cry, the call.
Hermione started to run.
She ran for a while; whenever she got to a junction she would pause,
catch as much breath as she could, and then she would see a ﬂash of ﬁre
reﬂected from one direction or another, or hear that distant call. If it
hadn’t been for her army training she would’ve fallen over in exhaustion,
running like that.
She never saw the phoenix.
And then she came to a four-way branch and there was nothing, no
sign, she waited for long seconds and she heard no cry and saw no ﬁre,
and she was only just starting to wonder with a sick sad feeling if she’d
imagined the whole thing, when she heard a person cry out.
When her rapidly racing feet turned the corner her mind took in the
whole scene at a glance, three huge boys in green-trimmed robes already

I

* 1097 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-NINE

*
*

*

turning to look at her, and one shorter and smaller boy in yellow, who
was dangling in the air from one foot held up high by an invisible hand.
The Sunshine General didn’t even think about it, people who
stopped to think didn’t spring very good ambushes.
Her wand was in her hand, her ﬁngers did the twist and her lips said
“Somnium!” and one of the bullies fell over, the Huﬄepuﬀ boy dropped
out of the air with a thump and the other two bullies were trying to aim
their wands at her and she said “Somnium!” again and another huge boy
keeled over—the one who’d been aiming his wand faster, that was who
she’d ﬁred at.
Unfortunately casting two Sleep Hexes in a row like that was hard
even for her, and she couldn’t get oﬀ a third before—
The last bully shouted “Protego!” and was surrounded by a shimmering blue glow.
Twenty-four hours ago, Hermione would have panicked at that, a
real Shielding Charm would let the bully-boy cast spells on her even
while he was protected.
Now she—
“Stupefy!” shouted the bully-boy.
The crimson bolt blasted toward her with a terrible brilliance, blazing far brighter than any hex that had sprung from Harry’s wand.
Hermione swayed slightly to the left, and the bolt missed, because
the bully’s aim hadn’t been nearly as good as Harry’s; and the thought
came to her that maybe bullies and Professor Quirrell’s armies didn’t
mix.
“Stupefy!” shouted the bully-boy again. “Expelliarmus! Stupefy!”
Anyway, now she’d just spent a whole hour thinking of all the other
spells she could’ve cast on Harry and Neville—
“Jellyfy!” yelled the bully-boy, a wide-beam jinx with no visible bolt
to dodge, and her knees suddenly felt almost too weak to support her.
And then, with an angry roar producing an even brighter blaze of crimson, “Stupefy!”
She dodged that one by deliberately falling, and by then she’d recovered enough for her next spell, which was—
“Lubriceum,” said Hermione, directing her remark to the ﬂoor.
* 1098 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION I V

*
*

*

“Oof,” said the bully-boy as his feet went out from under him and he
actually dropped his wand.
The Protego winked out.
“Somnium,” said Hermione.
She was still breathing in gasps as she crawled over to where the Hufﬂepuﬀ boy was sitting up, and groaning and rubbing his skull where he’d
been dropped head-ﬁrst into the ﬂoor; it was a good thing he hadn’t been
a Muggle, Hermione realized, or he might have snapped his neck. She
hadn’t actually thought of that.
“Uh,” said the boy, his hair was of a color that would’ve been called
‘brunette’ if he was a girl, his eyes an undistinguished brown that somehow seemed just right for Huﬄepuﬀ, there weren’t any tears on his face
but he looked sort of pale. She pegged him at about fourth year, or third.
Then the brown eyes widened as he focused on her. “General Sunshine?”
“Yeah,” she said. “That’s (gasp) me.” If the Huﬄepuﬀ boy said anything about her being Harry Potter’s love interest, she decided, he was
going to die.
“Wow,” said the Huﬄepuﬀ boy. “That was—you just—I mean I saw
you on the screens before Christmas but—wow! I can’t believe you just
did that!”
There was a pause.
I can’t believe I just did that, thought Hermione Granger, who was
feeling a little faint all of a sudden, it must have been all that running.
“Excuse (gasp) me,” she said, “can you (gasp) Unjellyfy my legs?”
The boy nodded, pushed himself to his feet, and reached inside his
robes for his wand; but Hermione had to correct his gesture before the
counter-Jinx worked right.
“I’m Michael Hopkins,” said the boy once Hermione had rolled back
to her own feet. He stuck out his hand. “Or just Mike inside Huﬄepuﬀ,
there aren’t any other Mikes in all of Huﬄepuﬀ this year, would you
believe it?”
They shook hands, and Mike said, “Anyway, thank you.”
Hermione wasn’t prepared for the rush of euphoria that hit her then,
saving someone like that literally felt better than anything she’d ever felt
* 1099 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-NINE

*
*

*

in her whole life.
She turned to look at the bullies.
They were very big and they looked, she thought, around ﬁfteen
years old, and she was suddenly realizing just how large a diﬀerence had
sprung up between Hogwarts students who’d signed up for all of Professor Quirrell’s extra-curricular activities, and students who’d had years of
being taught by the worst Professors ever to go Professing. Being able
to hit things that you aimed at, for example; or being able to think well
enough in the middle of a ﬁght to realize that you ought to Innervate
your fallen allies. And other things Professor Quirrell had said, like that
in the real world almost any ﬁght would be settled by a surprise attack,
suddenly made a lot more sense to her.
Still trying to catch her breath, she looked back at Mike.
“Would you (gasp) believe,” said Hermione Granger, “that ﬁve minutes ago I was (gasp) having trouble ﬁguring out how to become a (gasp)
hero?”
Had she really thought she needed permission from someone, or that
heroes sat around waiting for someone else to give them quests? It was
very simple actually, you just went where the evil was, that was all it
ever took to be a hero. She should’ve remembered, she shouldn’t have
needed a phoenix to tell her, that bad things sometimes happened right
here in Hogwarts.
Then Hermione glanced nervously back at where the three older
boys were lying unconscious as the realization hit that they’d seen her,
they might know who she was, they might sneak up on her and take her
by surprise and—and they could really hurt her—
Hermione stopped.
She remembered that Harry Potter had put himself in the middle of
ﬁve Slytherin bullies on the ﬁrst day of class when he hadn’t even known
how to use his wand.
She remembered the Headmaster saying that you grew up by being
put in grownup situations, and that most people lived their lives inside
a constraining circle of fear.
And she remembered Professor McGonagall’s voice saying, ‘You are
twelve.’
* 1100 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION I V

*
*

*

Hermione took a deep breath, once, twice, and three times.
She asked Mike if he needed to go to Madam Pomfrey’s oﬃce, which
he didn’t; and got him to tell her the names of the Slytherin boys, just
in case.
And then Hermione Granger strolled away from the heap of unconscious bullies, making sure to put a smile on her face as she walked.
She knew that she was probably going to get hurt sooner or later.
But if you were too scared of getting hurt to do what was right, then
you couldn’t be a hero, it was as simple as that; and if you’d put the
Sorting Hat on her head at that moment it wouldn’t have waited even
one second before calling out ‘Gryffindor!’

**
*
She was still thinking about it when she came down to dinner; the euphoria of saving someone still hadn’t worn oﬀ, and she was beginning
to worry that it had broken something in her brain.
As she approached the Ravenclaw table a sudden epidemic of whispers broke out, and Hermione wondered if the Huﬄepuﬀ boy had said
anything yet before she realized that the whispers probably weren’t
about that.
She sat down across from Harry Potter who looked extremely nervous, probably because she was still smiling.
“Uh—” said Harry, as she served herself freshly toasted bread, butter, cinnamon, no fruits or vegetables whatsoever, and three helpings of
chocolate brownies. “Uh—”
She let him go on like that until she’d ﬁnished pouring herself a
glass of grapefruit juice, and then she said, “I’ve got a question for you,
Mr. Potter. How do you think people fail to become themselves?”
“What?” said Harry.
She looked at him. “Pretend there isn’t all this stuﬀ going on,” she
said, “and just say whatever you’d have said yesterday.”
“Um...” Harry said, looking very confused and worried. “I think we
already are ourselves... it’s not like I’m an imperfect copy of someone
*

1101 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-NINE

*
*

*

else. But I guess if I try to run with the sense of the question, then I’d
say that people don’t become themselves because we absorb all this crazy
stuﬀ from the environment and then regurgitate it. I mean, how many
people playing Quidditch would be playing a game like that if they’d
invented the game themselves? Or back in Muggle Britain, how many
people who think of themselves as Labour or Conservative or Liberal
Democrat would invent that exact bundle of political beliefs if they had
to come up with everything themselves?”
Hermione considered this. She’d been wondering if Harry would
say something Slytherin or maybe even Gryﬃndor, but this didn’t seem
to ﬁt into the Headmaster’s list; and it occurred to Hermione that there
might be a lot more viewpoints on the subject than just four.
“Okay,” said Hermione, “diﬀerent question. What makes someone
a hero?”
“A hero?” said Harry.
“Yeah,” said Hermione.
“Ah...” Harry said. His fork and knife nervously sawed at a piece
of steak, cutting it into tinier and tinier pieces. “I think a lot of people
can do things when the world channels them into it... like people are
expecting you to do it, or it only uses skills you already know, or there’s
an authority watching to catch your mistakes and make sure you do
your part. But problems like that are probably already being solved,
you know, and then there’s no need for heroes. So I think the people we
call ‘heroes’ are rare because they’ve got to make everything up as they
go along, and most people aren’t comfortable with that. Why do you
ask?” Harry’s fork stabbed three pieces of thoroughly shredded steak
and lifted them up to his mouth.
“Oh, I just stunned three older Slytherin bullies and rescued a Hufﬂepuﬀ,” said Hermione. “I’m going to be a hero.”
When Harry had ﬁnished choking on his food (some of the other
Ravenclaws in hearing distance were still coughing) he said, “What?”
Hermione told the story, it began rippling out in further whispers
even as she spoke. (Though she left out the part about the phoenix,
because that seemed like a private thing between the two of them. Hermione had felt surprised, thinking about it afterward, that a phoenix
*

1102 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION I V

*
*

*

would appear for someone who wanted to be a hero; it seemed a bit selfish when she thought about it that way; but maybe it didn’t matter to
phoenixes so long as they saw that you were willing to help people.)
When she was done talking, Harry stared at her across the table and
didn’t say a word.
“I’m sorry for how I acted earlier,” Hermione said. She sipped from
her glass of grapefruit juice. “I should’ve remembered that if I’m still
beating the pants oﬀ you in Charms class then it’s okay for you to do
better in Defense.”
“Please don’t take this the wrong way,” said Harry. He looked tooadult now, and grim. “But are you sure this is who you are, and not, to
put it bluntly, me?”
“I’m quite certain,” said Hermione. “Why, my name practically
spells out ‘heroine’ except for the extra ‘m’, I never noticed that until
today.”
“Being a hero isn’t all fun and games,” said Harry. “Not real heroing,
the sort grownups have to do, it isn’t like this, it isn’t going to be this
easy.”
“I know,” said Hermione.
“It’s hard and it’s painful and you’ve got to make decisions where
there isn’t any good answer—”
“Yes, Harry, I read those books too.”
“No,” said Harry, “you don’t understand, even if the books warn
you there’s no way you can understand until—”
“That doesn’t stop you,” said Hermione. “It doesn’t stop you even a
little. I bet you never even considered not being a hero because of that.
So why d’you think it’ll stop me?”
There was a pause.
A sudden huge smile lit Harry’s face, a smile that was as bright and
as boyish as the frown had been grim and adult, and everything was all
right again between them.
“This is going to go horribly mind-bogglingly wrong somehow,” said
Harry, still smiling hugely. “You know that, right?”
“Oh, I know,” said Hermione. She ate another bite of toast. “That
reminds me, Dumbledore refused to be my mysterious old wizard, is
*

1103 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-NINE

*
*

*

there someplace I can write to get another one?”
Aftermath:
“...and Professor Flitwick says her determination seems unshakeable,” Minerva said tightly, staring at the silver-bearded old wizard who
was responsible for this. Albus Dumbledore was just sitting silently and
listening to her with a distant sad look in his eyes. “Miss Granger didn’t
even blink when Professor Flitwick threatened to have her transferred
to Gryﬃndor, just said that if she left she would take all the books with
her. Hermione Granger has decided she’s going to be a hero and she’s
not taking no for an answer. I doubt you could have pushed her into
this any harder if you had tried to—”
It took all of ﬁve full seconds for Minerva’s brain to process the realization.
“ALBUS!” she shrieked.
“My dear,” said the old wizard, “after you have dealt with your thirtieth hero or so, you will realize that they react quite predictably to certain
things; such as being told that they are too young, or that they are not
destined to be heroes, or that being a hero is unpleasant; and if you truly
wish to be sure you should tell them all three. Although,” with a brief
sigh, “it does not do to be too blatant, or your Deputy Headmistress
might catch you.”
“Albus,” Minerva said, her voice even tighter, “if she is hurt, I swear
this time I’ll—”
“She would have come to that same place in due time,” Albus said,
the distant sad look still in his eyes. “If someone is meant to become a
hero then they will not listen to our warnings, Minerva, no matter how
hard we try. And given that, it is better for Harry if Miss Granger does
not fall too far behind him.” Albus produced, as though from nowhere,
a tin which ﬂipped open to reveal small yellow lumps, she’d never been
able to ﬁgure out where he kept it and she’d never been able to detect
the magic involved. “Lemon drop?”
“She is a twelve-year-old girl, Albus!”
*

1104 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION I V

*
*

*

Afteraftermath:
Within the windows, barely visible in the evening gloom, ﬁshes
swam in the black waters, illuminated by the bright shine of the
Slytherin common room as they came closer, fading into darkness as
they swam away.
Daphne Greengrass was sitting in a comfortable black leather couch,
her head collapsed into her hands, glowing golden-yellowish as bright
sparks of white light winked in and out of existence around her.
She’d been ready to be teased about liking Neville Longbottom.
She’d been expecting to hear a lot of snide remarks about Huﬄepuﬀs.
She’d thought of whole reams of snappy comebacks for it while she was
on the way back to the Slytherin dungeons.
She’d been looking forward to being teased about liking Neville. Being teased about that sort of thing meant you’d grown up into a real
girl.
As it turned out, nobody had worked out that her challenging
Neville to a Most Ancient Duel meant that she liked him. She’d thought
it would be obvious but no, nobody else had even thought of that apparently.
It was always the hex you didn’t see that hit you.
She should’ve just called herself Daphne of Sunshine, like Neville of
Chaos. Or Sunny Daphne like Sunny Ron. Or anything except Greengrass of Sunshine.
Greengrass of Sunshine.
It had gone from there to Greengrass of Sunshine and Blue Skies.
Then someone had added Snow-Topped Mountains and Frolicking
Woodland Creatures.
Currently she was being referred to as the Sparkly Unicorn Princess
of the Noble and Most Ancient House of Sparklypoo.
And some cursed sixth-year girl had hit her with a Sparkling Jinx,
she hadn’t even known there was such a thing as a Sparkling Jinx, and
Finite Incantatem hadn’t worked, and she’d asked older girls who she’d
thought were her friends (she had apparently been wrong about this) and
then she’d threatened the caster with grievous political mayhem wreaked
*

1105 *

**
*

CHAPTER SIXT Y-NINE

*
*

*

by her father and nonetheless Daphne Greengrass was still sitting in the
Slytherin common room with her head in her hands, sparkling brightly
and wondering how she’d ended up as the only sane person in Hogwarts.
It was after dinnertime and they were still at it and if they didn’t
stop by tomorrow morning she was going to transfer to Durmstrang
and become the next Dark Lady.
“Hey, everyone!” said the Carrow twins dramatically, waving an issue of the Daily Prophet. “Did you hear the news? The Wizengamot just
ruled that ‘let’s see what you got’ constitutes a lawful challenge to be
fought until the challenger lies down and has a nap!”
“How dare you insult the honor of the Sparkly Unicorn Princess!”
shouted Tracey. “Let’s see what you got!” Then Tracey lay down ﬂat on
her sofa and started snoring loudly.
Daphne’s sparkling head sank further into her glowing hands. “After
my family takes over I’m going to have you all put under anti-Apparition
jinxes and Flooed into the sea,” she said to no one in particular. “You’re
all okay with that, right?”
Thunk-thunk, thunk-thunk-thunk, thunk.
Daphne looked up, surprised; that was a Sunshine code-signal—
“I hight someone knocking!” bellowed Mr. Goyle. “Knocking of the
door!”
“Let’s see what you’ve got, doory!” shouted an older boy near the door,
and yanked the door open.
There was a moment of complete surprise.
“I’ve come to have a word with Miss Greengrass,” said the Sunshine
General, sounding like she was trying to sound conﬁdent. “Could someone please—”
From the look on Hermione’s face she had just noticed Daphne
sparkling.
And that was when Millicent Bulstrode raced up from the lower
dorms and shouted, “Hey, everyone, guess what, now Granger went
and beat up Derrick and what’s left of his crew, and his father owled
him and said that if he didn’t—”
Millicent caught sight of Hermione standing in the doorway.
There was a very loud silence.
*

1106 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION I V

*
*

*

“Uh,” said Daphne. What? said her brain. “Uh, what’re you doing
here, General?”
“Well,” said Hermione Granger with a strange smile on her face, “I’ve
decided it’s not fair if mysterious old wizards give some people a chance
to be heroes and not others, and also I’ve read history books and there
aren’t nearly enough girl heroes in them. So I thought I’d just drop by
and see if you wanted to be a hero and why are you glowing like that?”
There was another silence.
“This,” said Daphne, “was probably not the best time to ask me that
question—”
“I’ll take it!” shouted Tracey Davis, leaping oﬀ her sofa.

**
*
And thus was born the Society for the Promotion of Heroic Equality
for Witches.

*

1107 *

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
PART V
ven if you had been the Deputy Headmistress for three decades, and
a Transﬁguration Professor before that, it was rare that you saw
Albus Dumbledore caught completely ﬂatfooted.
“...Susan Bones, Lavender Brown, and Daphne Greengrass,” Minerva ﬁnished. “I should also note, Albus, that Miss Granger’s account
of your seemingly unsupportive attitude—I believe her phrase was ‘he
said I should be happy to be just a sidekick’—has generated a good deal
of interest among the older girls. Several of whom came to me to ask if
Miss Granger’s accusations were true, since Miss Granger had said that
I was there.”
The old wizard leaned back in his huge chair, still gazing at her, his
eyes looking rather abstracted beneath the half-moon glasses.
“It placed me in something of a dilemma, Albus,” said Professor
McGonagall. Her face stayed quite neutral, she made sure of that. “I
now know that you did not truly mean to discourage the girl. Quite the
opposite, in fact. But you and Severus have often told me that to keep
a secret I must give no sign that diﬀers from the reaction of someone
truly ignorant. Thus I had no choice but to conﬁrm that Miss Granger’s account was accurate, and feign the appropriate degree of worry,
with a slight overtone of oﬀense. After all, had I not known you were
deliberately manipulating Miss Granger, I might have been rather put
out.”
“I... see,” the old wizard said slowly. His hands toyed absently with
his silver beard, small quick gestures.

E

* 1109 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y

*
*

*

“Thankfully,” Professor McGonagall continued, “so far Professors
Sinistra and Vector are the only two faculty members to don Miss Granger’s buttons.”
“Buttons?” repeated the old wizard.
Minerva drew forth a small silver disc bearing the initials sphew, laid
it on Albus’s desk, and gave it a brief tap with her ﬁnger.
And the voices of Hermione Granger, Padma Patil, Parvati Patil,
Lavender Brown, Susan Bones, Hannah Abbott, Daphne Greengrass,
and Tracey Davis cried out in unison, “We won’t settle for second best, it’s
time to give a witch a quest!”
“Miss Granger is selling them for two Sickles, and tells me that she has
so far sold ﬁfty of them. I believe that Nymphadora Tonks, in seventhyear Huﬄepuﬀ, is enchanting them for her. To conclude my report,”
Professor McGonagall said briskly, “our eight newly minted heroines
have asked permission to conduct a protest outside the entrance to your
oﬃce.”
“I hope,” Albus said, frowning, “you explained to them that—”
“I explained to them that Wednesday at 7pm would be ﬁne,” said Minerva. She took back the button from the Headmaster’s desk, favored
Albus with a honeyed smile, and turned to the door.
“Minerva?” said the old wizard from behind her. “Minerva!”
The oaken door shut solidly behind her.

**
*
There wasn’t a lot of room between the brief stone walls that demarcated
the vestibule to the Headmaster’s oﬃce, so although a lot of people had
wanted to watch the protest, not many had been allowed to come. Just
Professor Sinistra and Professor Vector, who were wearing the buttons,
and the prefects Penelope Clearwater and Rose Brown and Jacqueline
Preece, who were wearing the buttons. Behind them, Professor McGonagall and Professor Sprout and Professor Flitwick, who weren’t wearing the buttons, scrutinizing the whole aﬀair. Harry Potter and the
Head Boy of Hogwarts were there, and the boy prefects Percy Weasley
*

1110 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION V

*
*

*

and Oliver Beatson, all wearing the buttons to show Solidarity. And of
course the eight founding members of sphew, forming a picket line next
to the gargoyles with their signs. Hermione’s own sign, attached to a
solid wooden handle which seemed to weigh heavier and heavier in her
hands as the seconds passed, said Nobody’s Sidekick.
And Professor Quirrell, who was leaning with his back against the
far stone wall and watching with unreadable eyes. The Defense Professor
had gotten one of her buttons, though she’d never sold one to him; and
he wasn’t wearing it, but idly tossing it with one hand.
This whole idea had seemed like a much better idea four days ago,
when the ﬁres of her indignation had been burning fresh and hot, and
she’d been facing the prospect of doing it all four days later instead of
right now.
But she had to carry on, because that was what heroes did, they carried on, and also because it had seemed inﬁnitely too awful to tell everyone she was calling it oﬀ. Hermione wondered how much heroism
had gone on for reasons like that. Most books didn’t say “And then they
refused to give up, no matter how sensible it would have been, because
that would’ve been too embarrassing”; but a great deal of history made
a lot more sense that way.
At 7:15pm, Professor McGonagall had told her, Headmaster Dumbledore would come down and talk to them for a couple of minutes.
Professor McGonagall had said not to be frightened—the Headmaster
was a good person deep down, and they’d properly gotten the school’s
authorization for the protest.
But Hermione was very very aware that even if she was doing it with
signed permission, she was still Defying Authority.
After she’d decided to be a hero, Hermione had done the obvious
thing, and gone to the Hogwarts library and taken out books on how
to be a hero. Then she’d returned those books back to their shelves,
because it’d been patently obvious that none of the authors had been actual heroes themselves. Instead she’d just read ﬁve times over, until she’d
memorized every word, the thirty inches by Godric Gryﬃndor that was
all his autobiography and his life’s advice. (Or the English translation,
anyway; she couldn’t read Latin yet.) Godric Gryﬃndor’s autobiog*

1111

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y

*
*

*

raphy had been a lot more compressed than the books Hermione was
used to reading, he used one sentence to say things that should’ve taken
thirty inches just by themselves, and then there was another sentence
after that...
But it was clear from what she’d read that, while Defying Authority
wasn’t the point of being a hero, you couldn’t be a hero if you were too
scared to do it. And Hermione Granger knew by now how others saw
her, and she knew what other people thought she couldn’t do.
Hermione hefted her picket sign a little higher and concentrated on
breathing slowly and rhythmically instead of hyperventilating until she
fell over.
“Really?” said Miss Preece in a tone of undisguised fascination. “They
couldn’t vote?”
“Indeed,” said Professor Sinistra. (The Astronomy Professor’s hair
was still dark, and her dark face only slightly lined; Hermione would
have guessed her age at around seventy, except—) “I quite remember my
mother’s rejoicing when they announced the Qualiﬁcation of Women
Act, although she did not actually qualify.” (Which meant that Professor
Sinistra had been around her Muggle family in 1918.) “And that wasn’t
the worst of it. Why, just a few centuries earlier—”
Thirty seconds later all the non-Muggleborns, male and female both,
were staring at Professor Sinistra with utterly shocked expressions. Hannah had dropped her sign.
“And that wasn’t the worst of it either, not by half,” ﬁnished Professor Sinistra. “But you see where this sort of thing could potentially
lead.”
“Merlin preserve us,” said Penelope Clearwater in a strangled voice.
“You mean that’s how men would treat us if we didn’t have wands to
defend ourselves?”
“Hey!” said one of the boy prefects. “That’s not—”
There was a short, sardonic laugh from the direction of Professor
Quirrell. When Hermione turned her head to look she saw that the
Defense Professor was still idly toying with the button, not bothering
to glance up at the rest of them, as he said, “Such is human nature, Miss
Clearwater. Rest assured that you would be no kinder, if witches had
*

1112

*

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION V

*
*

*

wands and men lacked them.”
“I hardly think so!” snapped Professor Sinistra.
A cold chuckle. “I suspect it happens more often than any dare suggest, in the proudest pureblood families. Some lonely witch spies a handsome Muggle; and thinks how very easy it would be, to slip the man a
love potion, and by him be adored alone and utterly. And since she
knows he can oﬀer her no resistance, why, it is only natural for her to
take from him whatever she pleases—”
“Professor Quirrell!” said Professor McGonagall sharply.
“I’m sorry,” Professor Quirrell said mildly, his eyes still looking
down on the button in his hand, “are we all still pretending it doesn’t
happen? My apologies, then.”
Professor Sinistra snapped, “And I suppose that wizards don’t—”
“There are children present, Professors!” Again Professor McGonagall.
“Some do,” Professor Quirrell said equably, as though discussing the
weather. “Although personally, I don’t.”
There was a bit of silence, for a time. Hermione put up her sign
again—it had slipped down to her shoulder while she was listening. She’d
never thought of that, not even a little, and now she was trying not to
think of it, and her stomach was feeling a bit queasy. She looked in
Harry Potter’s direction, not quite knowing why she did; and she saw
that Harry’s face was perfectly still. A chill ran down her spine before
she looked away, not quite fast enough to miss the small nod that Harry
gave her, as though they were agreeing on something.
“To be fair,” Professor Sinistra said after a while, “since I received my
Hogwarts letter I can’t recall encountering any prejudice on account of
being a woman, or colored. No, now it is all for being a Muggleborn.
I believe Miss Granger said that it was just with heroes that she found a
problem, so far?”
It took Hermione a moment to recognize that she’d been asked the
question, and then she said “Yes,” in a tone that squeaked a little. This
whole thing had blown up a bit larger than she’d imagined when she’d
started it.
“What exactly did you check, Miss Granger?” said Professor Vector.
*

1113 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y

*
*

*

She looked older than Professor Sinistra, her hair starting to gray a little;
Hermione hadn’t ever come close to Professor Vector in person until the
Arithmancy Professor had asked her for a button.
“Um,” Hermione said, her voice a little high, “I checked the history
books and there’s been as many woman Ministers of Magic as men. Then
I looked at Supreme Mugwumps and there were a few more wizards
than witches but not many. But if you look at people like famous Dark
Wizard hunters, or people who’ve stopped invasions of Dark creatures,
or people who’ve overthrown Dark Lords—”
“And the Dark Wizards themselves, of course,” said Professor Quirrell. Now the Defense Professor had looked up. “You may add that to
your list, Miss Granger. Among all the suspected Death Eaters we know
of only two sorceresses, Bellatrix Black and Alecto Carrow. And I daresay that most wizards would be hard-pressed to name a single Dark Lady
besides Baba Yaga.”
Hermione just stared at him.
He couldn’t possibly be—
“Professor Quirrell,” said Professor Vector, “what exactly are you
implying?”
The Defense Professor raised the button so that the golden-lettered
sphew faced them, and said, “Heroes,” then turned the button to show its
silver backside and said, “Dark Wizards. They are similar career paths
followed by similar people, and one can hardly ask why young witches
are turning away from one course without considering its reﬂection.”
“Oh, now I see!” said Tracey Davis, speaking up so suddenly that Hermione gave a small startle. “You’re joining our protest because you’re
worried that not enough girls are becoming Dark Witches!” Then Tracey
giggled, which Hermione couldn’t have managed at this point if you paid
her a million pounds sterling.
There was a half-smile on Professor Quirrell’s face as he replied, “Not
really, Miss Davis. In truth I do not care about that sort of thing in
the slightest. But it is futile to count the witches among Ministers of
Magic and other such ordinary folk leading ordinary existences, when
Grindelwald and Dumbledore and He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named were
all men.” The Defense Professor’s ﬁngers idly spun the button, turning
*

1114

*

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION V

*
*

*

it over and over. “Then again, only a very few folk ever do anything
interesting with their lives. What does it matter to you if they are mostly
witches or mostly wizards, so long as you are not among them? And I
suspect you will not be among them, Miss Davis; for although you are
ambitious, you have no ambition.”
“That’s not true!” said Tracey indignantly. “And what’s it mean?”
Professor Quirrell straightened from where he had been leaning
against the wall. “You were Sorted into Slytherin, Miss Davis, and I
expect that you will grasp at any opportunity for advancement which
falls into your hands. But there is no great ambition that you are driven
to accomplish, and you will not make your opportunities. At best you
will grasp your way upward into Minister of Magic, or some other high
position of unimportance, never breaking the bounds of your existence.”
Then Professor Quirrell’s gaze shifted away from Tracey, he was
looking at her, the pale blue eyes staring at her with an awful intensity—
“Tell me, Miss Granger. Do you have an ambition?”
“Professor—” squeaked the high stern voice of Professor Flitwick,
and then her Head of House’s voice cut oﬀ, and from the side of her vision Hermione saw that Harry had laid his hand on Professor Flitwick’s
shoulder and was shaking his head, face looking very adult.
Hermione felt like a deer caught in headlights.
“What drove you to break your bounds, Miss Granger?” said the Defense Professor, still gazing directly at her. “Why is getting good marks
in class no longer enough? Is it true greatness that you seek? Does some
aspect of the world dissatisfy you, that you must remake according to
your will? Or is this all merely a child’s game to you? I will be quite
disappointed if this is only about rivaling Harry Potter.”
“I—” said Hermione, her voice so high-pitched it made a sort of peeping sound, but then she couldn’t think of what else to say.
“You may take a moment to think, if you like,” said Professor Quirrell. “Pretend it is a homework essay, six inches due Thursday. I hear
you are quite eloquent in them.”
Everyone was looking at her.
“I—” said Hermione. “I don’t agree with one single thing you just
said, anywhere.”
*

1115

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y

*
*

*

“Well spoken,” came Professor McGonagall’s crisp voice.
Professor Quirrell’s gaze did not waver. “That is not six inches, Miss
Granger. Something drives you to defy the Headmaster’s verdict and
gather followers about yourself. Perhaps it is something you prefer not
to speak aloud?”
Hermione knew the correct answer wouldn’t impress Professor
Quirrell, but it was the correct answer, so she said it. “I don’t think you
need ambition to be a hero,” Hermione said. Her voice wavered but it
didn’t crack. “I think you just have to do what’s right. And they’re not
my followers, we’re friends.”
Professor Quirrell leaned back against the wall again. The half-smile
had faded from his face. “Most folk tell themselves they are doing right,
Miss Granger. They do not thereby rise above the ordinary.”
Hermione took a couple of deep breaths, trying to be brave. “It’s
not about being not ordinary,” she said as stoutly as she could. “But I
think if someone just tries to do what’s right, over and over again, and
they’re not too lazy to do all the work it takes, and they think about
what they’re doing, and they’re brave enough to do it even when they’re
scared—” Hermione paused for an instant, her eyes darting to Tracey
and Daphne, “—and they cleverly plan how to do it—and they don’t just
do what other people do—then I think someone like that would already
get into enough trouble.”
Some of the girls and boys chuckled, as did Professor McGonagall,
who looked wry and proud at the same time.
“You may be right about that,” said the Defense Professor, his eyes
half-lidded. He tossed Hermione the button, and she caught it without
thinking. “My donation to your cause, Miss Granger. I understand that
they are worth two Sickles.”
The Defense Professor turned and walked away without another
word.
“I thought I was going to faint!” gasped Hannah after his footsteps
had faded, and she heard some of the other girls letting out their breath
or putting down their signs for a moment.
“I do too have an ambition!” said Tracey, who seemed to be almost
on the verge of tears. “I’m—I’m—I’ll ﬁgure out what it is by tomorrow,
*

1116

*

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION V

*
*

*

but I have one, I’m sure!”
“If you really can’t think of anything,” Daphne said, giving Tracey a
comforting pat on the shoulder, “just go with the oldie but goodie and
try to take over the world.”
“Hey!” said Susan sharply. “You’re supposed to be heroes now! That
means you have to be good!”
“No, it’s all right,” said Lavender, “I’m pretty sure General Chaos
wants to take over the world and he’s sort of a good guy.”
More conversation was going on behind the picket line. “My goodness,” said Penelope Clearwater. “I think that’s the most overtly evil
Defense Professor we’ve ever had.”
Professor McGonagall coughed warningly, and the Head Boy said,
“You weren’t around for Professor Barney,” which made several people
twitch.
“Professor Quirrell just talks like that,” said Harry Potter, though he
sounded less certain than before. “I mean, think about it, he doesn’t do
anything like what Professor Snape does—”
“Mr. Potter,” squeaked Professor Flitwick, voice polite and face stern,
“why did you ask me to stay silent?”
“Professor Quirrell was testing Hermione to see if he wanted to be
her mysterious old wizard,” Harry said. “Which totally would not have
worked out in any way, shape, or form, but she had to answer for herself.”
Hermione blinked.
Then Hermione blinked again, as she realized that it was Professor
Quirrell who was Harry Potter’s mysterious old wizard, and not Dumbledore at all, and that really wasn’t a good sign—
A rumbling noise ﬁlled the small stone vestibule, and Hermione,
her nerves already on edge, spun rapidly around, almost dropping her
protest sign as her other hand darted toward her wand.
The gargoyles were stepping aside, the Flowing Stone rumbling like
rock as it moved like ﬂesh. The huge ugly ﬁgures waited only brieﬂy,
dead gray eyes staring out in silent vigil. Then the great gargoyles folded
their wings back into place and stepped back into their former positions,
the Flowing Stone not changing its outward appearance at all as it re*

1117

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y

*
*

*

turned from ﬂexibility to motionlessness, and the brief gap in the stone
of Hogwarts was solid once more.
And before them all, wearing robes of bright purple that probably
only looked hideous if you were Muggleborn, stood the towering form
of Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore, the Headmaster of Hogwarts, the Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot, the Supreme Mugwump of
the International Confederation of Wizards, the vanquisher of the Dark
Lord Grindelwald and protector of Britain, the rediscoverer of the fabled
Twelve Uses of Dragon’s Blood, the most powerful wizard alive; and he
was looking at her, Hermione Jean Granger, General of the recently expanded Sunshine Regiment, who was getting the best grades in the ﬁrst
year of Hogwarts classes, and who had declared herself a heroine.
Even her name was shorter than his.
The Headmaster smiled benevolently at her, his wrinkle-lined eyes
twinkling cheerfully beneath their half-circles of glass, and said, “Hello,
Miss Granger.”
The odd thing was that it wasn’t nearly as scary as talking to Professor
Quirrell. “Hello, Headmaster Dumbledore,” Hermione said with only
a slight quaver in her voice.
“Miss Granger,” said Dumbledore, now looking more serious, “I
think you and I may have had a bit of a misunderstanding. I did not
mean to imply that you could not, or should not be a hero. I certainly
did not mean to imply that witches in general should not be heroes.
Only that you were... a bit young, to be thinking of such things.”
Hermione, unable to help herself, glanced at Professor McGonagall and saw that Professor McGonagall was giving her an encouraging
smile—or she was giving the two of them some kind of smile, anyway—so
Hermione looked back at the Headmaster and said, the small quaver in
her voice a little larger now, “Since you became Headmaster forty years
ago, there’ve been eleven students to graduate Hogwarts who became
heroes, I mean people like Lupe Cazaril and so on, and ten of those were
boys. Cimorene Linderwall was the only witch.”
“Hm,” said the Headmaster. There was a thoughtful expression on
his face; he at least seemed to be thinking about it. “Miss Granger, I
have never been one for tallying such numbers. Often it is too much
*

1118 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION V

*
*

*

easier to count than to understand. Many good people have come out of
Hogwarts, witches and wizards both; those famed as heroes are only one
kind of good person, and perhaps not the highest. You did not include
Alice Longbottom or Lily Potter in your reckoning... But leave that
aside. Tell me, Miss Granger, did you tally how many heroes came out
of Hogwarts in the forty years before me? For in that time I can recall
only three now called heroes; and among those three, no witches at all.”
“I’m not trying to say it’s just you!” Hermione said. “Only I think
maybe a lot of people, like the Headmasters before you too, maybe even
your whole society and everything, might be discouraging girls.”
The old wizard sighed. His half-glasses eyes looked only at her, as
though they were the only two people present. “Miss Granger, it might
be possible to discourage witches from becoming Charms Mistresses, or
Quidditch players, or even Aurors. But not heroes. If someone is meant
to be a hero then a hero they will be. They will walk through ﬁre and
swim through ice. Dementors will not stop them, nor the deaths of
friends, and not discouragement either.”
“Well,” Hermione said, and paused, struggling with the words.
“Well, I mean... what if that’s not actually true? I mean, to me it seems
that if you want more witches to be heroes, you ought to teach them
heroing.”
“Many boys and girls are heroes in their dreams,” Dumbledore said
quietly. He did not look at any of the other girls, only at her. “Fewer in
the waking world. Many have stood their ground and faced the darkness
when it comes for them. Fewer come for the darkness and force it to face
them. It is a hard life, sometimes lonely, often short. I have told none to
refuse that calling, but neither would I wish to increase their number.”
Hermione hesitated; there was something in the lined face that
stopped her, like a hint to all the emotion that wasn’t being displayed,
years and years of it...
Maybe if there were more heroes, their lives wouldn’t be so lonely, or so
short.
She couldn’t bring herself to say that, though, not to him.
“But the point is moot,” said the old wizard. He smiled, a bit ruefully
she thought. “Miss Granger, you cannot teach heroism like you would
*

1119 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y

*
*

*

teach Charms. You cannot assign twelve inches on how to carry on
when all hope seems lost. You cannot rehearse students on when to
stand up and tell the Headmaster he has done wrong. Heroes are born,
not taught. And for whatever reason, more of them are born boys than
girls.” The Headmaster shrugged, as if to say that he was helpless to do
anything about that.
“Um,” Hermione said. She couldn’t help it, she glanced behind her.
Professor Sinistra was looking a bit indignant. And it wasn’t true
that everyone was staring at her like she’d just been silly, the way she’d
started to imagine while she was listening to Dumbledore.
Hermione turned back to face Dumbledore again, took a deep
breath, and said, “Well, maybe people who are going to be heroes, will be
heroes no matter what. But I don’t see how anyone could really know
that, aside from just saying it afterward. And when I told you that I
wanted to be a hero, you weren’t very encouraging.”
“Mr. Potter,” the Headmaster said mildly. His eyes didn’t leave hers.
“Please tell Miss Granger your impression of our own ﬁrst meeting.
Would you say that I was encouraging? Speak the truth.”
There was a pause.
“Mr. Potter?” said Professor Vector’s voice from behind her, sounding puzzled.
“Um,” Harry’s voice said from further back, sounding extremely reluctant. “Um... well, actually in my case the Headmaster set ﬁre to a
chicken.”
“He what?” Hermione blurted, only there were several other people
exclaiming things at around the same time so she wasn’t sure anyone
heard her.
Dumbledore went on gazing at her, looking perfectly serious.
“I didn’t know about Fawkes,” Harry’s voice said rapidly, “so he told
me that Fawkes was a phoenix, while he was pointing to a chicken on
Fawkes’s stand so I’d think that was Fawkes, and then he set the chicken
on ﬁre—and also he gave me this big rock and told me it had belonged
to my father and I ought to carry it everywhere—”
“But that’s crazy!” Susan blurted out.
There was a sudden hush.
*

1120 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION V

*
*

*

The Headmaster slowly turned his head to stare at Susan.
“I—” said Susan. “I mean—I—”
The Headmaster leaned down until he was face-to-face with the
young girl.
“I didn’t—” said Susan.
Dumbledore put a ﬁnger to his lips and twiddled them, making a
bweeble-bweeble-bweeble sound.
“Albus,” said the weary voice of Professor McGonagall.
The Headmaster straightened up again and said, “Well, my good
heroines, it has been pleasant speaking to you, but alas, much else remains to do this day. Still, rest assured that I am inscrutable at everyone,
not just witches.”
The gargoyles stepped aside, the Flowing Stone rumbling like rock
as it moved like ﬂesh.
The huge ugly ﬁgures waited brieﬂy with dead gray eyes staring out
in silent vigil, as Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore, smiling as
benevolently as when he’d ﬁrst emerged from his oﬃce, stepped back
into the Enchantment of the Endless Stair.
Then the great gargoyles folded their wings back into place and
stepped back into their former positions, only one last brief “Bwa-haha!” echoing out before the gap closed.
There was a long silence.
“He really set a chicken on ﬁre?” said Hannah.

**
*
The eight of them had continued protesting even after that, but to be
honest their heart had gone out of it.
It had been established, after some careful questions from Professor
Flitwick, that Harry Potter hadn’t smelled the chicken burning. Which
meant that it had probably been a pebble or something, Transﬁgured
into a chicken and then enclosed in a Boundary Charm to make sure that
no smoke escaped into the air—both Professor Flitwick and Professor
*

1121

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y

*
*

*

McGonagall had been very emphatic about nobody trying that without
their supervision.
But still...
But still... what?
Hermione didn’t even know but still what.
But still.
After a lot of glances exchanged between girls none of whom had
wanted to be ﬁrst to say it, Hermione had declared the protest over, and
the adults and boys had drifted oﬀ.
“You don’t think we were being unfair to Dumbledore, do you?”
said Susan as the heroines walked away to the sound of eight pairs of feet
trodding on the stone paving of Hogwarts’s corridors. “I mean, if he is
crazy at everyone and not just at witches then it’s not discrimination,
right?”
“I don’t want to protest against the Headmaster any more,” Hannah
said weakly. The Huﬄepuﬀ girl seemed a bit unsteady on her feet. “I
don’t care what Professor McGonagall says about him not holding it
against us, it’s just too much for my nerves.”
Lavender snorted. “I guess you won’t be slaying armies of Inferi anytime soon—”
“Stop that!” Hermione said sharply. “Look, all of us have got to learn
to be heroines, right? It’s okay if someone doesn’t know right away.”
“The Headmaster doesn’t think it can be learned,” Padma said. The
Ravenclaw girl’s face was thoughtful, her steps measured as she strode
through the corridor. “The Headmaster doesn’t even think that’s a good
idea.”
Daphne was striding with her back straight and her head held bolt
upright, looking more like a Proper Young Lady in her Hogwarts robes
than Hermione could have done with her best formal dress. “The Headmaster,” Daphne said in a precise voice, her shoes making hard, sharp
tacking sounds on the stone, “thinks the lot of us are a bunch of silly girls
playing games, and that someday Hermione might make a good sidekick
but the rest of us are hopeless.”
“Is he right?” said Parvati. The Gryﬃndor girl’s face was very serious,
making her look much more like her twin than she usually did. “I mean
*

1122 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION V

*
*

*

it has to be asked—”
“No!” spat Tracey. The Slytherin girl was stalking through the hallway looking ready to kill someone, like a miniature female Snape. Of
all the girls, Tracey was the one who Hermione knew least. Hermione
had talked to Lavender once before, but she’d never really seen Tracey
except at wandpoint during a battle, until the Slytherin had jumped up
from her sofa to volunteer. Right now Tracey looked so angry there
should’ve been sparks ﬂying oﬀ her. “We’ll show him! We’ll show them
all!”
“Okay,” said Susan, “that was deﬁnitely evil—”
“No,” said Lavender, “that’s a Chaos Legion motto, actually. Only
she didn’t do the insane laughter.”
“That’s right,” Tracey said, her voice low and grim. “This time I’m
not laughing.” The girl went on stalking through the corridor, like she
had dramatic music accompanying her that only she could hear.
(Hermione was starting to worry about what exactly the impressionable youths of the Chaos Legion were learning from Harry Potter.)
“But—I mean—” Parvati said. She still had a contemplative look on
her face. “I mean, you can see why the Headmaster would think we were
just silly girls, right? What does protesting outside the Headmaster’s
oﬃce have to do with becoming heroines?”
“Huh,” Lavender said, now looking thoughtful herself. “That’s true.
We should do something heroic. I mean heroinic.”
“Um—” said Hannah, which very much expressed Hermione’s own
feelings on the subject.
“Well,” said Parvati, “has everyone already been through Dumbledore’s third-ﬂoor forbidden corridor? I mean everyone in Gryﬃndor’s
been through it by now—”
“Hold on!” Hermione said desperately. “I don’t want you doing anything dangerous!”
There was a pause while everyone looked at Hermione, who was suddenly realizing, much too late, why Dumbledore hadn’t wanted anyone
else to be a hero.
“I don’t think you can become a heroine if you never do anything
dangerous,” Lavender observed reasonably.
*

1123 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y

*
*

*

“Besides,” said Padma, a considering look on her face. “Everyone
knows that nothing really bad ever happens in Hogwarts, right? To students, I mean, not to the Defense Professors. We’ve got all these ancient
wards and so on.”
“Um—” Hannah said again.
“Yeah,” said Parvati, “the worst that can happen is that we’ll lose a
few dozen House points or something, and there’s two of us from each
House so that’ll all come out even.”
“Why, that’s brilliant, Hermione!” said Daphne in a tone of great
amazement. “The way you set it up means we can get away with anything! And I didn’t even notice your cunning plan until now!”
“UM—” said Hermione, Hannah, and Susan.
“Right!” said Parvati. “So now it’s time for us to become real heroines. We’ll come for the darkness—”
“And make it face us —” said Lavender.
“And teach it to be afraid,” Tracey Davis said grimly.

*

1124 *

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y-ONE

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
PART VI
ell,” Daphne whispered, keeping her voice as low as she could,
“at least now I don’t feel like the only sane person in Hogwarts any more.”
“Because now you’ve got the rest of us as friends?” whispered Lavender Brown, who was tiptoeing along at her left side.
“I don’t think that’s what she means,” General Granger murmured
from Lavender’s own left.
They crept slowly and carefully through the corridors of Hogwarts,
all eight of them keeping both ears peeled for the slightest sound of Trouble, just like it was a battle and they were looking for enemy soldiers
to ambush; only in this case they were looking for bullies to Vanquish
and victims to Rescue in the span between the end of breakfast-time and
when Lavender and Parvati had to get to their Herbology class.
Lavender had argued that if one ﬁrst-year girl could take down three
older bullies, then eight ﬁrst-year girls ought to be able to outﬁght
twenty-four older bullies because of Multiplication.
Judging by her frantic spluttering and waving of hands, General
Granger hadn’t found this convincing.
Padma had stayed silent for a bit during the ensuing argument, and
then observed thoughtfully that even in Hogwarts, beating up ﬁrst-year
girls probably wouldn’t be good for your reputation as a bully.
Parvati had straightened up at this, exclaiming that this meant they
were the only ones who could do something about Hogwarts’s bully

“W

*

1125 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

problem, which made it really truly heroinic. Plus the whole reason their
parents had moved to Britain was so that the two of them could attend
the world’s only magical school with a 0% fatality rate, and what was
the point if they didn’t take advantage and try a few things?
To which General Granger had responded that Parvati didn’t understand the point of a perfect safety record at all—
Lavender had said that if they were really all friends together and not
Hermione’s followers like Professor Quirrell thought, then they should
vote on things like this.
Daphne had known that hers would be the deciding vote after Hermione and Susan and Hannah voted no. And so Daphne had considered it carefully after her ﬁrst ﬂush of enthusiasm wore oﬀ. She was a
Slytherin, after all, and that meant it was her responsibility to keep a
watchful eye on their own interests while they were all running around
trying to help people—her job to ﬁgure out how risky it really was, and
whether it would be worth it for them, just like Mother would have done
in her place. Always looking out for yourself and your friends like that,
was what real Slytherining was all about...
Hannah Abbott, the nervous little Huﬄepuﬀ girl, had in a small
trembling voice said “Yes.”
And now Daphne and Susan and Hermione had to stay with the
other ﬁve, they couldn’t possibly let the others go oﬀ on their own. Because no Gryﬃndor would ever live down hurting the last surviving
child of the Bones family, and no Slytherin would dare assault a daughter of the Noble and Most Ancient House of Greengrass. (Daphne hoped
so, anyway.) And General Granger who’d started the whole thing... you
didn’t even have to ask.
The corridors of Hogwarts passed them by one after another, their
tense hands never straying far from their wands, as stone and wood and
Everburning Torches came into vision and then moved past. At one
point they heard footsteps and drew in their breath, hands almost dropping to their wands, but it was just a lone older Ravenclaw who looked
at them curiously before sniﬃng and dropping his head back to his book
as he walked on.
The heroines crept past solemn oaken panels carved with gilded fres*

1126 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VI

*
*

*

cos, and came to a dead end leading into a boys’ bathroom, and turned
around, and wandered back through the solemn oaken panels carved
with gilded frescos, and then turned through dusty old brick corridors
grouted with worn cement, which sort of led them in a circle actually,
so they consulted a portrait and then went down a diﬀerent dusty old
brick corridor instead, that took them to a brief rise of marble stairs that
should’ve put them on the third-and-a-halfth ﬂoor if it’d been anywhere
but Hogwarts, and then it was back to tiled stone pavement again, and
skylights that let shafts of sunlight pour down even though they were
nowhere near the roof, and after they’d followed that passageway around
a few corners it took them to another boys’ bathroom, clearly marked
with a plaque showing the silhouette of a robed ﬁgure whizzing into a
toilet.
The eight of them stood before the closed door and stared with a
certain amount of weariness.
“I’m bored,” said Lavender.
Padma made a show of taking a pocketwatch out of her robes and
looking at it. “Sixteen minutes and thirty seconds,” she said. “A new
record for the longest attention span in Gryﬃndor.”
“I don’t think this is going to work either,” said Susan. “And I’m a
Huﬄepuﬀ.”
“Y’know,” Lavender said thoughtfully, “I wonder if maybe what really makes someone a hero, is that when they try something like this,
something interesting actually happens.”
“I bet you’re right,” said Tracey. “I bet if we had Harry Potter with us,
we’d run into three bullies and a hidden room full of treasure in the ﬁrst
ﬁve minutes. I bet that all General Chaos has to do is go to the bathroom
and he, like, ﬁnds Slytherin’s Chamber of Secrets or something—”
Daphne couldn’t quite let that one go past. “You think Lord
Slytherin would’ve put the entrance to the Chamber of Secrets in a bathroom—”
“What I’m saying,” said Susan, as Tracey was opening her mouth to
reply, “is that we’ve got no way of actually ﬁnding any bullies. I mean,
all they’ve got to do is ﬁnd a Huﬄepuﬀ somewhere, but we’ve got to
run across them at exactly the right time, d’you see? Which is a very
*

1127 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

good problem because if we did ﬁnd them we’d all get squished like bugs.
Can’t we just do the forbidden third-ﬂoor corridor like we’re supposed
to?”
Lavender snorted scornfully. “You don’t become a real heroine just
by doing the forbidden things the Headmaster tells you not to do!”
(Daphne’s mind tried to wrap around this statement as she silently
thanked the Sorting Hat for not putting her anywhere near Gryﬃndor.)
“Come to think...” Parvati said slowly, “I mean, what’re the odds that
Harry Potter would run across those ﬁve bullies on his ﬁrst morning of
school? He must’ve had some way of ﬁnding them.”
Daphne happened to be standing where looking at Parvati let her see
Hermione, so she noticed the Ravenclaw girl’s expression change—and
then she realized that the Sunshine General had also found some bullies
just recently—
“Oh!” said Padma in a tone of sudden realization. “Of course! He
got told by the ghost of Salazar Slytherin!”
“What?” said Daphne at the same time as several other people.
“That’s who the ghost was that scared me, I’m pretty sure,” Padma
explained. “I mean I only ﬁgured it out afterward, but... yeah. Salazar
Slytherin’s ghost doesn’t like it when Slytherins bully people, he thinks
it shames his name, and the ghost is still keyed into the Hogwarts wards
so he knows everything that happens, I bet.”
Daphne’s mouth was hanging open; and she saw that Hannah had
put a hand to her forehead and was leaning against the stone walls, while
Tracey’s eyes were blazing like little brown stars.
Salazar Slytherin’s ghost?
Had leagued himself with Harry Potter?
And had sent Hermione Granger to stop Derrick’s crew?
She would have paid a hundred Galleons to be there when Draco
Malfoy got told about this.
Although considering how fast rumors spread through Hogwarts,
now that Padma had spilled the beans, Millicent had probably told him
thirty minutes ago...
In fact... now that Daphne thought about it...
“So,” said Parvati. “We’ve got to ask the Boy-Who-Lived where to
*

1128 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VI

*
*

*

ﬁnd Salazar Slytherin’s ghost? Wow, I guess if I’m saying stuﬀ like that
out loud, I might actually be turning into a heroine—”
“Yes!” said Lavender. “We’ve got to ask the Boy-Who-Lived where
to ﬁnd Salazar Slytherin’s ghost!”
“We’ve got to ask... the Boy-Who-Lived... where to ﬁnd Salazar
Slytherin’s ghost...” repeated Hannah in a nervous voice, like she was
forcing herself to say it.
“And if that doesn’t work,” shouted Tracey, “we’ll stun Harry Potter,
tie him up and bring him with us!”

**
*
It said something, Hermione Granger thought, and it was something
rather sad—as the eight of them strolled back through the maze of twisty
little passages that was Hogwarts, their time before the next class having
run out without ﬁnding any bullies—that she genuinely didn’t know
whether Harry Potter had been led around by the ghost of Salazar
Slytherin or a phoenix or what. And whatever Harry had done, she
hoped it didn’t work for them. And most of all she hoped that the others didn’t vote for Tracey’s idea of stunning Harry Potter and carting
his unconscious body around with them to attract Adventures. That
couldn’t possibly work in real life, or, if it did, she was giving up.
Hermione looked from witch to witch, Tracey chatting with Lavender, and the others making occasional remarks; and her gaze caught on
a girl who was subdued and quiet, the one person whose thoughts right
now she couldn’t guess at all.
“Hannah?” she said to the girl walking alongside her. Hermione tried
to make her voice as gentle as she could. “You don’t have to answer, but
is it okay if I ask why you voted yes on ﬁghting bullies?”
Hermione had thought she’d made her voice soft, but everyone
stopped walking, and Lavender and Tracey halted their conversation and
looked at them.
Hannah’s cheeks were already reddening, and just as Hannah opened
her mouth—
*

1129 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

“It’s ’cause she’s got more courage than you think, obviously,” said
Lavender.
Hannah paused with her mouth open.
She closed her mouth.
She swallowed, hard and visibly, while her cheeks reddened even further.
Then Hannah took a deep breath, and said, in a small voice, “There’s
a boy I like.”
The Huﬄepuﬀ girl ﬂinched as she said it, and her head darted around
nervously to look at everyone looking at her, while the pause and silence
stretched.
“Um, okay?” Susan said eventually.
“I’ve got ﬁve boys I like,” said Lavender.
“Padma and I knew we’d both like the same boys,” said Parvati, “so
we made a list and ﬂipped a Knut to see who got to pick ﬁrst.”
“I know who I’m destined to marry,” said Tracey. “I don’t care what
the world says, he’s meant to be mine!”
This made all the other girls look expectantly at Hermione, whose
brain had gone ahead and ﬂushed Tracey’s last statement entirely so it
could focus on just on the ﬁrst thing Hannah had said.
“Um,” said Hermione. She carefully continued keeping her voice
gentle. “Hannah, the reason why you joined the Society for Promotion
of Heroic Equality for Witches was that there’s a boy who might like
you more if you become a hero?”
The Huﬄepuﬀ girl nodded again, her cheeks reddening even further
while she stared down at her own reﬂection in her black-polished shoes.
“She likes Neville Longbottom, actually,” Daphne said. The
Slytherin gave a woeful sigh. “And unfortunately for her, he’s going
to marry someone else. It’s very tragic.”
This produced a high-pitched eeping sound from Hannah as she went
on staring at her feet.
“Wait what?” said Lavender. “Neville’s going to marry someone else?
How do you know about this? Who?”
Daphne just shook her head sadly with a downcast expression.
“Excuse me,” said Hermione, and then when the others looked at her
*

1130 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VI

*
*

*

again, “Ah...” while she tried to organize her thoughts. “I mean, um...
Hannah... trying to become a hero so that a boy will like you isn’t very
feminist.”
“It’s pronounced feminine actually,” said Padma.
“And why’re you calling Hannah unfeminine?” said Susan. “There’s
nothing unfeminine about wanting to impress a boy.”
“Besides,” said Parvati, sounding puzzled, “isn’t the whole point that
we’re trying to be heroes even though that isn’t feminine?”
The ensuing discussion would not be remembered by Hermione
Granger as one of her most successful forays into the realms of political
education. She tried to explain, and then after the resulting argument
tried to explain again, while the other seven girls looked at her more and
more skeptically. Afterward Daphne declared in the imperious tones
of the future Lady Greengrass that if this feminism business meant girls
weren’t allowed to pursue boys in whichever way they pleased, then
feminism could stay in the Muggle lands where it belonged. Lavender
suggested that maybe witchism could say that witches got to do anything
they wanted, which sounded like more fun than feminism. And ﬁnally
Padma closed oﬀ further discussion by observing wearily that she didn’t
see much point to going on arguing, since sphew wasn’t about anything
to do with feminism in the ﬁrst place, it was just about more girls becoming heroes.
Hermione had given up at that point.

**
*
As their Charms session that day ended and the ﬁrst-year Ravenclaws began shuﬄing out of the class, Hermione was already wincing to herself.
They’d made it to class just barely before the opening gong, they’d had
to run right over to their desks and sit down, so there hadn’t been time
for the awful thing to happen yet; but that just meant that Hermione got
to look forward to the coming disaster for the whole class.
Sure enough, after Professor Flitwick squeaked his dismissal and everyone rose from their chairs, Harry began walking toward her; and for
*

1131

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

her own part Hermione shoved her book into her mokeskin pouch and
very quickly walked over to the door and threw it open and headed into
the corridors, and of course Harry followed her with a surprised look
because they had a library session scheduled—
“Hermione?” Harry said as he closed the door behind him. “What’s
wrong?”
The door ﬂew open behind Harry not a moment after he closed
it, almost hitting Harry as he stepped out of the way, and Padma Patil
stepped out of the classroom with a dreadful look of determination upon
her face.
“Excuse me, Mr. Potter,” came the awful words, the young girl’s high
voice resounding through the corridor like the gloomy bells of doom,
“can I ask you for help with something?”
Harry’s eyebrows drew up, and he said, “You can ask, of course.”
“Can you tell us how to talk to Salazar Slytherin’s ghost? We want
him to tell us where to ﬁnd bullies, like he tells you.”
There was a little bit of silence in the corridor outside the classroom.
The door opened again, and Su peered out with an inquiring look—
“Well, we’ve got to get to the library,” Harry said quite casually, his
face looking relaxed, “would you mind following us?” and began to walk
oﬀ in the direction that led to the library on odd-numbered days of the
month, and Su made like she was going to follow but Harry’s face turned
toward her for a moment.
It wasn’t until Harry had rounded a corner that he drew his wand,
said in a low precise voice “Quietus” and then turned to Padma and said,
“An interesting guess, Miss Patil.”
Padma looked rather smug, then; and said, “I should’ve ﬁgured it
out earlier, really. There was that hiss in the ghost’s voice, I should’ve
thought Parselmouth right away, even before he started talking about
Godric Gryﬃndor.”
Harry’s face didn’t change. “May I ask, Miss Patil, whether you’ve
shared this thought with—”
“She said it in front of everyone in sphew,” Hermione said.
Harry’s eyes had that look they had when he was very rapidly calculating something, and then he said, “Hermione, what’s the chance
*

1132 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VI

*
*

*

that—”
“She said it in front of Lavender and Tracey.”
“Um,” said Padma. “Should I not’ve done that?”

**
*
“Wait here,” growled Mr. Goyle, and went around the corner; and there
was the sound of him knocking on Draco Malfoy’s private room.
There was a bit of a queasy feeling in Tracey’s stomach, and she reminded herself again that since Padma had spilled the beans someone was
bound to tell Draco Malfoy, and it might as well be her, and it wasn’t as
if she owed Harry Potter anything, and a Slytherin had to do what was
necessary to achieve her Ambitions.
She’d been collecting Ambitions ever since Professor Quirrell told
her oﬀ, and so far she’d decided that she wanted to own her own Nimbus 2000 broomstick, become super famous, marry Harry Potter, eat
Chocolate Frogs for breakfast every day, and defeat at least three Dark
Lords just to show Professor Quirrell who was ordinary.
“Mr. Malfoy will see you,” said the low, menacing voice of Mr. Goyle
as he returned. “And you’d better hope he doesn’t think you’re wasting
his time.” The boy loomed at her brieﬂy, and then stepped aside.
Tracey added having her own servants to her list of Ambitions, and
entered.
The Malfoy private bedroom looked just like Daphne’s. She’d
been privately hoping for diamond chandeliers or golden frescos on the
walls—she’d never have said it in front of Daphne, but the House of Malfoy was a step up from Greengrass. But it was just a small bedroom like
Daphne’s, and the only diﬀerence was that Malfoy’s stuﬀ was decorated
in silver snakes instead of emerald plants.
As she stepped through the doorway, Draco Malfoy—who was perfectly groomed even inside his own bedroom—rose up from his desk
chair to greet her with a small friendly bow, wearing a charming smile
*

1133 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

just like she was someone who mattered, which made Tracey so ﬂustered that she forgot everything she’d rehearsed inside her head and just
blurted out, “I’ve got something to tell you!”
“Yes, Gregory said so,” Draco Malfoy said smoothly. “Please, Miss
Davis, sit down.” He gestured to his own desk chair, even as he sat down
on his bed.
She felt somewhat lightheaded as she carefully sat herself down in
Malfoy’s own chair, her ﬁngers unthinkingly ﬁddling with how her dress
robes fell across her knees, trying to make them look as elegant and
uncreased as Draco Malfoy’s—
“So, Miss Davis,” said Draco Malfoy. “What did you want to tell
me?”
Tracey hesitated, and then when Malfoy’s face started to look a bit
impatient, just stammered it all out, everything Padma had said about
Salazar Slytherin’s ghost sending Harry Potter to stop bullies and also
what Daphne had told her about Hermione Granger being in on it—
Draco Malfoy’s expression didn’t change at all as she spoke, not even
in the slightest, and it dawned on Tracey with a sickening lurch in her
stomach.
“You don’t believe me!” she said.
There was a slight pause.
“Well,” said Draco Malfoy, with a smile that wasn’t quite as charming
as his last one, “I do believe that’s what Padma said and what Daphne
said, so thank you anyway, Miss Davis.” The boy rose from where he’d
been sitting on his bed, and Tracey, not even thinking, rose from the
chair.
As he was escorting her to the door, just as he was about to turn the
knob, it occurred to Tracey that—“You didn’t ask what I wanted for the
information,” she said.
Draco Malfoy gave her some kind of look, she didn’t quite know
what it was supposed to mean, and he didn’t say anything.
“Well, anyway,” Tracey said, making an on-the-spot change to her
previous Plans, “I don’t want anything for the information, I was just
being friendly.”
A brief look of surprise crossed Draco Malfoy’s face for just an in*

1134 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VI

*
*

*

stant before his expression ﬂattened again and he said, “It’s not that easy
to become friends with a Malfoy, Miss Davis.”
Tracey smiled, and meant it. “Well, I’ll just go on being friendly,
then,” she said, and left the room with a skip in her step, feeling like a
real Slytherin for maybe the ﬁrst time in her life, and having just decided
that Draco Malfoy would be one of her husbands too.

**
*
After the girl was gone, Gregory came in, shut the door again and said,
“Are you alright, Mr. Malfoy?”
Draco said nothing to his servant and friend. His eyes gazed oﬀ into
nowhere, like he was trying to stare through the wall of his bedroom,
through the Hogwarts lake that surrounded the Slytherin dungeons,
through Earth’s crust and atmosphere and the interstellar dust of the
Milky Way, into the utterly empty and lightless void between galaxies
which no wizard and no scientist had ever seen.
“Mr. Malfoy?” Gregory said, starting to sound a little worried.
“I can’t believe I believed every word of that,” said Draco.

**
*
Daphne ﬁnished her ﬁnal inch of Transﬁguration and looked up across
the Slytherin common room, at where Millicent Bulstrode was still
working on her own homework. It was time to come to a Decision.
If sphew did go around trying to stun bullies, the bullies wouldn’t like
it, that was certain. And they’d try to do something unpleasant about
it, which was also certain. On the other hand, if the bullies got really
nasty then Hermione could ask Harry Potter for help, or they could
pool their combined Quirrell points and ask the Defense Professor for a
favor... No, the thing that Daphne was really worried about was if this
business got them in bad with Professor Snape. You didn’t want to ever
end up on the wrong side of Professor Snape.
*

1135 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

But since the day she’d challenged Neville to a Most Ancient Duel,
she’d noticed people looking at her diﬀerently. Even the Slytherins
who’d made fun of her were looking at her diﬀerently. It was dawning on Daphne that being the daughter of the Noble and Most Ancient
House of Greengrass brought in a lot more respect if you were a beautiful heroine born to a Most Ancient House, and not just a pretty noble
girl. It was the diﬀerence between having your role played by the lead actress and having your role played by a two-Galleon extra with a screechy
laugh.
Fighting bullies might not be the best way to become a heroine. But
Father had once told her that the trouble with passing up opportunities
was that it was habit-forming. If you told yourself you were waiting
for a better opportunity next time, why, next time you’d probably tell
yourself the same thing. Father had said that most people spent their
whole lives waiting for an opportunity that was good enough, and then
they died. Father had said that while seizing opportunities would mean
that all sorts of things went wrong, it wasn’t nearly as bad as being a
hopeless lump. Father had said that after she got into the habit of seizing
opportunities, then it was time to start being picky about them.
On the other hand, Mother had warned her not to take all of Father’s
advice, and said that Daphne wasn’t allowed to ask about Father’s sixth
year in Hogwarts until she was at least thirty years old.
Still (her Mother had confessed with a sigh) in the end Father had
gotten Mother to marry him and successfully plotted his way into a Most
Ancient House, so there was that.
Millicent Bulstrode ﬁnished her homework and began putting her
things away.
Daphne stood up from her desk, and walked over.
Millicent swung out her legs from the table and stood up, slinging
her bookbag over one shoulder, then looked over at where Daphne was
approaching, the girl’s expression puzzled.
“Hey, Millicent,” Daphne said as she drew near, making her voice
low and excited, “guess what I ﬁgured out today?”
“The thing about Salazar Slytherin’s ghost helping Granger?” said
Millicent. “I already heard about that—”
*

1136 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VI

*
*

*

“No,” Daphne said in a hushed whisper, “this is even better.”
“Really?” Millicent said, in an equally low, equally excited voice.
“What is it?”
Daphne looked around conspiratorially. “Come to my room and I’ll
tell you.”
They went oﬀ toward the stairs that led downward, the private rooms
were even lower in the lake than the seventh-year dorms...
Soon enough Daphne was sitting in her comfy desk-chair and Millicent had bounced over to the edge of her bed.
“Quietus,” said Daphne, when they were both seated; and then instead of putting her wand away inside her robes, Daphne just let her
hand fall naturally down to her side, still holding the wand, just in case.
“All right!” said Millicent. “What is it?”
“You know what I ﬁgured out?” said Daphne. “I ﬁgured out that you
get the gossip so fast, you know about things before they actually happen.”
Daphne had half-expected Millicent to turn white and fall over, and
she didn’t really, but the girl did ﬂinch pretty hard before she started
stammering denials.
“Don’t worry,” said Daphne with her sweetest smile, “I won’t tell
anyone else you’re a seer. I mean, we’re friends, right?”

**
*
Rianne Felthorne, seventh-year of Slytherin, was working diligently on
yet another two-foot essay (she was taking everything except Divination
and Muggle Studies and her N.E.W.T. year seemed to consist entirely
of homework) when her Head of House strode up to the table she was
working at and barked “You will come with me, Miss Felthorne!” and
walked away even as she frantically began putting away her parchment
and book and quill.
When she caught up with Professor Snape, he was waiting just outside the room and gazing at her with half-lidded eyes that seemed far too
intense; and before she could ask what this was about he spun without a
*

1137 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-ONE

*
*

*

word and stalked oﬀ through the hallways, so that she had to scramble
to keep up.
Their walk took them down a ﬂight of stairs, and then another, below what she’d thought was the lowest level of the Slytherin dungeons.
And the corridors began to look older in their appearance, the architecture reverting back in time by centuries into roughened stone held
together by crude-looking mortar. She began to wonder if Professor
Snape was taking her to the real dungeons that she’d heard rumors of,
the true dungeons of Hogwarts that had been sealed oﬀ to all but faculty;
and if maybe Professor Snape did terrible things down there to innocent
helpless young girls but that was probably just wishful thinking on her
part.
They went down another ﬂight of stairs, and came out into a room
that was no room at all, but an empty rock cavern with a single door,
pierced by many dark openings and lit by a single torch of ancient style
that ﬁred as they entered.
Professor Snape took out his wand, then, and began to cast Charm
after Charm, she lost track of how many; and when the Potions Master
was done he turned back toward her, locked his intense eyes on hers,
and said in a level voice unlike his usual drawl, “You will say nothing to
anyone of this matter, Miss Felthorne, nothing now or ever. If that is
acceptable to you, nod. If not, we will turn and go.”
She nodded, frightened and with a strange hope dawning in her heart
(well, not exactly her heart).
“The task I have for you is very simple, Miss Felthorne,” said Professor Snape’s toneless voice, “and your extremely generous pay of ﬁfty
Galleons is merely to compensate you for being Memory-Charmed afterward.”
She drew an involuntary breath. Her family might be rich but they
had other daughters and kept her on a tight leash and it was certainly a
lot of money for her.
Then her ears caught up with the words Memory-Charmed and for a
moment she felt outraged, there was no point if she couldn’t keep the
memories, what sort of girl did Professor Snape think she was?
“You surely know,” said Severus Snape, “of Miss Hermione Granger,
*

1138 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VI

*
*

*

the Sunshine General?”
“What?” said Rianne Felthorne in sudden horror and disgust. “She’s
in her ﬁrst year! Ew!”

*

1139 *

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y-TWO

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
PART VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y
he winter Sun had well set by the time dinner ended, and so it
was amid the peaceful light of stars twinkling down from the enchanted ceiling of the Great Hall that Hermione left for the Ravenclaw
Tower alongside her study partner Harry Potter, who lately seemed to
have a ridiculous amount of time for studying. She hadn’t the faintest
idea of when Harry was doing his actual homework, except that it was
getting done, maybe by house elves while he slept.
Nearly every single pair of eyes in the whole Hall lay on them as they
passed through the mighty doors of the dining-room, which were more
like siege gates of a castle than anything students ought to go through on
the way back from supper.
They went out without speaking, and walked until the distant babble
of student conversation had faded into silence; and then the two of them
went on a little further through the stone corridors before Hermione
ﬁnally spoke.
“Why’d you do that, Harry?”
“Do what?” said the Boy-Who-Lived in an abstracted tone, as if
his mind were quite elsewhere, thinking about vastly more important
things.
“I mean, why didn’t you just tell them no?”
“Well,” Harry said, as their shoes pattered across the tiles, “I can’t just
go around saying ‘no’ every time someone asks me about something I

T

*

1141

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

haven’t done. I mean, suppose someone asks me, ‘Harry, did you pull
the prank with the invisible paint?’ and I say ‘No’ and then they say
‘Harry, do you know who messed with the Gryﬃndor Seeker’s broomstick?’ and I say ‘I refuse to answer that question.’ It’s sort of a giveaway.”
“And that’s why,” Hermione said carefully, “you told everyone...”
She concentrated, rembering the exact words. “That if hypothetically
there was a conspiracy, you could not conﬁrm or deny that the true
master of the conspiracy was Salazar Slytherin’s ghost, and in fact you
wouldn’t even be able to admit the conspiracy existed so people ought
to stop asking you questions about it.”
“Yep,” said Harry Potter, smiling slightly. “That’ll teach them to
take hypothetical scenarios too seriously.”
“And you told me not to answer anything—”
“They might not believe you, if you deny it,” said Harry. “So it’s
better to say nothing, unless you want them to think you’re a liar.”
“But—” Hermione said helplessly. “But—but now people think I’m
doing things for Salazar Slytherin!” The way the Gryﬃndors had been
looking at her—the way the Slytherins had been looking at her—
“It goes along with being a hero,” Harry said. “Have you seen what
the Quibbler says about me?”
For a brief second Hermione imagined her parents reading a newspaper article about her, and instead of the story being about her winning a nationwide spelling bee or any of the other ways she’d imagined
getting into the papers, the headline said “HERMIONE GRANGER
GETS DRACO MALFOY PREGNANT”.
It was enough to make you think twice about the whole heroine
business.
Harry’s voice turned a bit more formal. “Speaking of which, Miss
Granger, how goes your latest quest?”
“Well,” said Hermione, “unless the ghost of Salazar Slytherin really
does show up and tell us where to ﬁnd bullies, I don’t think we’re going
to have much luck.” Not that she was sorry about that.
She glanced over at Harry, and saw the boy giving her a peculiarly
intense look.
“You know, Hermione,” the boy said quietly, as though to make sure
*

1142 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

that nobody else in the world heard, “I think you’re right. I think some
people get a lot more help than others in becoming heroes. And I don’t
think that’s fair, either.”
And Harry grabbed at her witch’s robes where they lay over her
arm, and hustled her into a side-hall of the corridor they were walking
through, her mouth gaping open in surprise even as Harry’s wand came
into his hand, they rounded a curve of the side-hall and it was so narrow
that it was almost pushing her and Harry into each other, even as Harry
pointed to the way they’d come and softly said “Quietus”, then a moment
later, in the other direction, “Quietus” again.
The boy looked searchingly around them, not just to every side, but
even upward toward the ceiling and down toward the ﬂoor.
And then Harry stuck a hand in his pouch and said, “Invisibility
cloak.”
“Gleep?” said Hermione.
Harry was already drawing out folds of shimmering black fabric
from the mokeskin device. “Don’t worry,” the boy said with a small
grin, “they’re so rare that nobody bothered to make a school rule against
them...”
And then Harry held out the dark velvet mesh to her, and said, his
voice strangely formal, “I do not give you, but loan you, my cloak, unto
Hermione Jean Granger. Protect her well.”
She stared at the shimmering velvet of the cloak, cloth that swallowed all the light that fell on it except what glinted from small strange
reﬂections, fabric so perfectly black it should’ve shown dust or lint or
something but it didn’t, the longer you looked the more you felt like
what you were seeing wasn’t really there at all, but then you blinked
again and it was just a black cloak.
“Take it, Hermione.”
Hardly even thinking, Hermione stretched out her hand to grasp
the fabric; and then just as her brain woke up and she started to pull
her hand back, Harry let go of the cloak and it started to fall and she
grabbed at it without thinking. And the instant her ﬁngers touched and
held the cloak she felt an intangible jolt run through her like picking up
her wand for the ﬁrst time; and it was like she heard a song being sung,
*

1143 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

ever so faintly, in the back of her mind.
“That’s one of my quest items, Hermione,” Harry said softly. “It
belonged to my father, and it’s not something I can replace, if it’s lost.
Don’t loan it to anyone else, don’t show it to anyone, don’t tell anyone
it exists... but if you want to borrow it for a while, just come to me and
ask.”
Hermione ﬁnally tore her eyes loose from the depthless black folds
and stared back up at Harry.
“I can’t—”
“You certainly can,” Harry said. “Because there’s nothing even the
tiniest bit fair about my ﬁnding this gift-wrapped in a box next to my
bed one morning, and you... not.” Harry paused thoughtfully. “Unless
you did get your own invisibility cloak, in which case never mind.”
Then the implications of invisibility cloak ﬁnally dawned on her, and
she pointed a shocked ﬁnger at Harry, though they were close enough
together that she couldn’t quite straighten her arm properly, and her
voice rose with considerable indignation as she said, “So that’s how you
disappeared from the Potions closet! And the time when—” and then
she trailed oﬀ, because even with an invisibility cloak she still couldn’t
see how Harry had...
Harry buﬀed his ﬁngernails on his robes with artful nonchalance,
and said, “Well, you knew there had to be some trick to it, right? And
now the heroine will mysteriously know where and when to ﬁnd bullies—just like she listened to the bullies planning it, even though nobody
her age could possibly have turned herself invisible to spy on them.”
There was a pause and a silence.
“Harry—” she said. “I’m—I’m not sure anymore that ﬁghting bullies
is such a good idea.”
Harry’s eyes stayed steady on hers. “Because the other girls might
get hurt?”
She nodded, just nodded.
“That’s their choice, Hermione, just like it’s yours. I decided not to
do the obvious stupid thing that everyone does in books, try to keep
you safe and protected and helpless, and have you get really angry at me,
and push me away while you go oﬀ on your own and get into even more
*

1144 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

trouble, and then heroically pull through it successfully, after which I’d
ﬁnally have my epiphany and realize that blah blah blah etcetera. I know
how that part of my life story goes, so I’m just skipping over it. If I can
predict what I’m going to think later, I might as well go ahead and think
it now. Anyway, my point is, you shouldn’t smother your friends to
keep them safe, either. Just tell them up front it’s predictably going to
go horribly wrong, and if they still want to be heroines after that, ﬁne.”
It was at times like this that Hermione wondered if she was ever going
to get used to the way Harry thought. “Harry, I really,” her voice stuck
for a second, “really, really don’t want them getting hurt! Especially
because of something I started!”
“Hermione,” Harry said seriously, “I’m pretty sure you did the right
thing. I don’t see what could realistically happen to them that would be
worse for them, in the long run, than not trying.”
“What if they get badly hurt?” Hermione said. Her voice felt blocked
in her throat; she remembered Captain Ernie saying how Harry had
just stared straight into the eyes of a bully as the bully bent his ﬁnger
back, before Professor Sprout had arrived to save him; and there was
another thought that came after that, about Hannah and her delicate
hands with the ﬁngernails that she carefully painted in Huﬄepuﬀ yellow
every morning, but that wasn’t allowed to be imagined. “And then—
they’ll never do anything courageous, ever again—”
“I don’t think it works like that,” Harry said steadily. “Even if it
all goes mind-bogglingly wrong, I don’t think it works like that inside
a human mind. The important thing is believing about yourself that
you’re someone who can break your boundaries. Trying and getting
hurt can’t possibly be worse for you than being... stuck.”
“What if you’re wrong, Harry?”
Harry paused for a moment, and then shrugged a little sadly, and
said, “What if I’m right?”
Hermione looked back at the black mesh running over her hand.
From the inside the cloak felt strangely soft and yet ﬁrm against her
palm, as if it was trying to give her hand a reassuring hug.
Then she lifted her arm back up, holding the cloak back to Harry.
Harry didn’t move to take it.
*

1145 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

“I—” said Hermione. “I mean, thank you, thank you a lot, but I’m
still thinking about it, so you can take it back for now. And... Harry, I
don’t think it’s right to spy on people—”
“Not even on known bullies, to rescue their victims?” Harry said.
“I’ve never been bullied, but I’ve been through a realistic simulation, and
it didn’t feel very pleasant. Have you ever been bullied, Hermione?”
“No,” she said in a quiet voice, and went on holding out Harry’s
invisibility cloak to him.
Finally Harry took back his cloak—she felt a small twitch of loss as
the inaudible song vanished from the back of her mind—and started to
stuﬀ the black material back into his pouch.
As the pouch ate the last of the fabric, Harry turned from her, to
break the Quieting Barrier—
“And, um,” Hermione said. “That’s not the Cloak of Invisibility,
is it? The one we read about in the library on page eighteen of Paula
Vieira’s translation of Gottschalk’s An Illustrated Scroll of Lost Devices?”
Harry turned his head back, grinning slightly, and said in exactly the
same tone of voice he’d used earlier with the other students at dinner,
“I cannot conﬁrm or deny that I possess magical artifacts of incredible
power.”

**
*
When Hermione climbed into bed that night she was still trying to decide. Her life had been simpler at dinnertime, back when there hadn’t
been any practical way for them to ﬁnd bullies; and now she had to
choose again; not for herself, this time, but for her friends. In her mind’s
eye she kept seeing Dumbledore’s lined face and the pain it hadn’t quite
hidden, and in her mind’s ears she kept hearing Harry’s voice saying
‘That’s their choice, Hermione, just like it’s yours.’
And her hand kept remembering the sensation of the cloak against
her ﬁngers, replaying it over and over in her mind. There was a power to
the feeling that compelled her thoughts to return to it, and to the song
she’d heard/hadn’t heard in a part of her mind and magic which now lay
silent once more.
*

1146 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

Harry had spoken to the cloak like it was a person, telling it to take
good care of her. Harry had said the cloak had belonged to his father,
that he couldn’t replace it if it was lost...
But... Harry wouldn’t really do that, would he?
Just hand her one of the three Deathly Hallows created centuries
before Hogwarts?
She could say that she felt ﬂattered, but this went way beyond feeling
ﬂattered, into making her wonder just what she was to Harry, exactly.
Maybe Harry was the sort of person who went around loaning ancient lost magical artifacts to anyone he considered a friend, but—
But when she thought about which part of his life Harry had said he’d
skipped over, the part where he tried to keep her safe and protected...
Hermione stared up at the ceiling of the Ravenclaw dorm. Somewhere beyond her bed, Mandy and Su were talking. She’d turned up her
Quieting Charm to where she couldn’t hear the exact words, but could
still hear their faint murmur; there was something comforting about
sleeping in a dorm with the other girls. Harry kept his own Quieter
turned up all the way, she knew.
She was starting to wonder if maybe Harry actually did, well...
You know...
Like her.
It took Hermione Granger a long time to fall asleep that night.
And when she woke up the next morning there was a small slip of
parchment peeking out from under her pillow which said At half-past ten
you will ﬁnd a bully in the fourth passageway to the left of the hall leaving
the Potions classroom—S.

**
*
When Hermione entered the Great Hall that morning, her stomach
was ﬁlled with ﬂying butterﬂies the size of Hippogriﬀs; even as she approached the Ravenclaw breakfast table she still hadn’t decided what to
do.
*

1147 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

There was an empty place next to Padma, she saw. That would be
where to sit down, if she was going to tell Padma and then ask Padma to
tell Daphne and Tracey.
Hermione walked toward the empty place next to Padma.
There were words waiting in her throat, Padma, I got a mysterious
message—
And she could feel a huge brick wall inside her, stopping the words
from coming out. She’d be putting Hannah and Susan and Daphne in
danger. Taking them and leading them by the hand straight into trouble.
That was Wrong.
Or she could just go try to handle the bully herself, without telling
her friends anything, and that, quite obviously, was also Wrong.
Hermione knew she was being faced with a Moral Dilemma, just like
all those wizards and witches she’d read about in stories. Only in stories
people always got a right choice and a wrong choice, not two wrong ones,
which seemed a bit unfair. But she had the sense, somehow—maybe it
came from the way Harry always talked about how the history books
would see them—that she was faced with a Heroic Decision, and that her
whole life might end up going one way or another, depending on what
she chose right now, this morning.
Hermione sat down at the table without looking to either side, just
gazing at the plate and silverware like they might have answers hidden
inside, thinking as hard as she ever had, and a few seconds later she heard
Padma’s voice whispering almost in her ear, “Daphne says she knows
where a bully’s going to be at ten-thirty today.”

**
*
Doomed.
They were all doomed, in Susan Bones’s opinion.
Auntie sometimes told stories which started out like this, people doing something they knew was stupid, and the stories usually ended with
someone being doomed all over the ﬂoor and all over the walls and getting on Auntie’s shoes.
*

1148 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

“Hey, Padma,” muttered Parvati, her voice just barely audible over
the soft impacts of eight girls tiptoeing through the corridor leading to
the Potions classroom, “d’you know why Hermione’s been sighing all
morning—”
“No talking!” hissed Lavender, the harsh whisper sounding much
louder than Parvati’s mutter. “You never know when Evil might be
listening!”
“Shhh!” said three other girls even more loudly.
Utterly, totally, quite extremely doomed.
As they approached the fourth passageway to the left of the Potions
classroom, where Daphne’s mysterious informant had said the bullying
would take place, the eight of them moved slower, the sound of their
feet got softer, and ﬁnally General Granger made the gesture that meant
Halt, I’ll look ahead.
Lavender raised a hand, then, and when Hermione turned to look
at her, Lavender, looking puzzled, pointed straight down the corridor,
gestured to herself, and then tried to sign something else that Susan didn’t
understand—
General Granger shook her head, and once again, this time with
slower, more exaggerated movements, made the sign for Halt, I’ll look
ahead.
Lavender, looking even more puzzled, pointed back the way they’d
come, and made a bouncing gesture with her other hand.
Now everyone else was looking even more confused than Lavender,
and Susan thought with some acerbity that evidently one hour of practice done two days ago wasn’t enough to remember a new set of code
signals.
Hermione pointed at Lavender, then at the ﬂoor beneath Lavender’s
feet, the expression on her face making it very clear that the intended
meaning was You. Stay. Here.
Lavender nodded.
Doom doom doom, went the words of the Chaos Legion’s marching
song through Susan’s mind, doom doom doom doom doom doom...
Hermione reached into her robes, and drew out a little rod with a
mirror on the end of it and an eyepiece. Very very softly indeed, the
*

1149 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Ravenclaw girl crept up to the wall, right next to where the passageway
opened oﬀ the corridor, and peeked just the tip of the eyepiece around
the corner.
Then a little more.
Then a little more.
Then General Granger cautiously stuck her head around the side.
General Granger turned back to them, nodded, and made the hand
gesture for follow me.
Susan felt a little better as she crept forward. The part of the Plan
which called for them to arrive thirty minutes before the bully had, apparently, actually worked. Maybe they were only slightly doomed...?

**
*
At ten-twenty-nine, almost on the dot, the bully showed up. If anyone
had been present to hear—though the corridor was apparently empty—
they would have heard his shoes clicking solidly through the main corridor, entering the passageway, walking toward where the passageway
turned its ﬁrst corner, turning that corner, and then stopping in some
surprise upon seeing that the passageway now terminated in a solid brick
wall where no wall had been before.
Then the bully shrugged and turned away, as he leaned back to watch
the main passage from just around the corner.
It was the castle Hogwarts, after all.
Behind the hastily Transﬁgured thin panels they’d assembled into
the outward appearance of a brick wall, the girls waited; not speaking,
not moving, hardly even breathing, but watching through the eyeholes
they’d left themselves.
As Susan’s gaze took in the bully, she could feel the tightening of her
chest all the way into her toes. The boy looked to be in his seventh-year
if not older, and his robes were trimmed in green instead of the red they’d
been hoping for, and he had muscles, and after staring for a bit longer,
Susan realized his stance had the balance that meant that he dueled.
*

1150 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

Then they all heard the sound of more feet approaching from the
corridor. The fourth-year Gryﬃndors and Slytherins had just been let
out of Potions class.
The footsteps pattered past, and diminished and faded, and the bully
didn’t do anything. For a moment Susan felt an instant of relief—
Then another, smaller group of footsteps approached.
The bully still didn’t do anything, as the footsteps went past.
That happened a few more times.
And then, as there approached the faintly audible sound of one last
set of footsteps, the seven girls heard the bully’s voice saying, clear and
cold and quiet, “Protego”.
Someone did gasp then, though fortunately very very quietly. If they
couldn’t get in even a single shot—
The bullies were learning already, Susan realized, she hadn’t expected
sphew to be able to do this very often before the bullies caught on—but—
Hermione had already defeated three bullies—and the school had been
buzzing with speculation about Salazar Slytherin’s ghost, yesterday—
He’s expecting us!
Susan would have whispered to give up, to abort the plan, only there
was no way to convey a message to—
“Silencio,” said the bully in a soft, deliberate voice with his wand
pointed toward the corridor, the blue haze of his Shielding Charm shimmering around him. “Accio victim.”
When the fourth-year boy came into their ﬁeld of vision he was dangling upside down as if an invisible hand were holding him high by one
leg, his red-trimmed robes beginning to slide down his thighs to reveal
the pants beneath. His mouth was opening and closing helpessly, no
sound coming out.
“I suppose you’re wondering what’s going on,” the seventh-year
Slytherin said in a quiet, cold voice. “Don’t worry. It’s so simple even a
Gryﬃndor could understand.”
With that, the Slytherin’s left hand formed a ﬁst and drove hard into
the Gryﬃndor’s belly. The fourth-year boy’s body jerked around frantically, but still no words left his mouth.
“You’re my victim,” said the older Slytherin. “I’m a bully. I’m going
*

1151

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

to beat you up. And we’ll see if anyone stops me.”
It was at that moment that Susan realized it was a trap.
And in almost the same moment, there rang out the mighty and highpitched voice of a young girl, crying, “Stop, evildoer! Finite Incantatem!”
Lavender, thought Susan, agonized. The Gryﬃndor girl had volunteered to be a distraction, while the rest of them executed a ﬂank attack
from where the bully wouldn’t expect it, that had been the plan, only
now—
“In the name of Hogwarts,” cried Lavender’s voice, though they
couldn’t see her, “and in the name of heroines everywhere, I command
you to let go of that EEK!”
“Expelliarmus,” said the bully. “Stupefy. Accio stupid heroine.”
When Lavender ﬂoated into their vision, dangling by one foot and
unconscious, Susan blinked; the girl was dressed in a bright crimson-andgold skirt and blouse, instead of her usual Hogwarts robes.
The bully was also giving the girl’s upside-down body an odd look,
and then he pointed his wand at her and said “Finite Incantatem,” but
the clothes stayed the same.
Then the bully shrugged, and, still facing in the direction of Lavender
instead of the dangling fourth-year boy, drew back his ﬁst—
“Lagann!” yelled ﬁve voices, and ﬁve green spirals blasted from ﬁve
wands aimed through ﬁve holes in the false wall, and an instant later
Hermione’s voice shouted “Stupefy!”
Five green spirals shattered ineﬀectually on blue haze, and Hermione’s red bolt bounced oﬀ the haze and struck the fourth-year boy, who
jerked and then was still.
And the seventh-year bully turned around, smiling grimly, as the
ﬁrst-year girls screamed and charged.

**
*
Susan’s eyes ﬂew open and instantly she was rolling away from where
she’d lain on the ﬂoor, her lungs still on ﬁre and her whole body still
aching from when she’d been hit, the battle had only moved forward a
*

1152 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

few seconds from what she could see, Hannah’s body falling with her
arm still stretched out toward Susan, “Glisseo!” shouted Hermione but
the older boy just slashed his wand down leaving a trail of green glow
behind and Hermione’s Charm visibly disrupted into a shower of bluewhite sparks, then in almost the same motion the bully said “Stupefy!”
and Hermione was blown backward and Susan summoned up all the
magic she had left and shouted “Innervate!” at Hermione’s body even as
the bully turned toward her, the bully’s wand pointed in her direction
again and then Padma yelled “Prismatis!” just before the bully shouted
“Impedimenta!”, the rainbow sphere forming around the bully and the
seventh-year Slytherin staggered as his own hex was reﬂected back at
him, but an instant later the bully’s wand swept back to tap himself and
then Padma’s Prismatic Sphere shattered like a blown soap bubble as the
bully’s wand cut through it and “Innervate!” yelled Parvati at Hannah’s
body and Tracey and Lavender screamed at the same time, “Wingardium
Leviosa!”—

**
*
Hannah Abbott held out her wand with a hand that trembled with exhaustion, she didn’t have enough magic left for even one Innervate, now.
The rest of the passageway was silent, scattered bodies lying across
the ground, Padma and Tracey and Lavender, Hermione and Parvati in
a heap against one wall, Susan standing in petriﬁed rigor as her eyes
tracked it all helplessly, even the Gryﬃndor boy lying sprawled and motionless (Hermione had woken him and he’d fought, but it hadn’t been
enough).
It had been a very short battle.
The bully was still smiling, the only signs of his exertion a wavering
ripple in the blue glow surrounding him, and a few beads of sweat on
his forehead.
The bully raised his arm, wiped the sweat oﬀ his forehead, and
stalked toward her like a man-shaped living Lethifold.
Hannah turned and ﬂed, spun and ran with screams kept bound in
her choking throat, sprinted past the fallen paneling of the fake brick
*

1153 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

wall, ran down the passageway with all the speed she could muster, weaving as much as she could—
Just before Hannah got to the turn in the passageway, the bully’s
voice from behind her said “Cluthe!” and she got awful cramps all
through her legs, she fell down and slid and hit her head against the
wall, only she didn’t even notice the pain of the smack as she started to
scream with the twisting muscles—
The bully was still stalking toward her, Hannah saw as she turned
her head; stalking toward her like a man-shaped living Lethifold, still
wearing that dreadful smile.
And she rolled, despite the pain as her leg muscles knotted up
around themselves, she rolled around the corner of the passageway, and
screamed, “Go away!”
“I think not,” said the bully, his voice deep and scary like that of a
grown man, sounding very close at hand now.
The bully walked around the corner and Daphne Greengrass stabbed
her Most Ancient Blade directly into his groin.
There was a ﬂash that lit up the whole corridor—

**
*
It was with a subdued mien that seven girls left Madam Pomfrey’s oﬃce,
leaving one of their own behind in a hospital bed.
Hannah would be all right in about thirty-ﬁve minutes, the healer
had said; torn muscles were easy to mend.
Daphne had done all the talking, and according to her, Hannah had
suﬀered a mishap with a Road-Running Charm which had caused the
leg cramps. Madam Pomfrey had given them a sharp look but hadn’t
argued, even though that Charm was around six years above their level.
Madam Pomfrey had also given Daphne a potion to help with her
state of total magical exhaustion, and warned her not to cast any spells
for the next three hours. That, supposedly, was from Daphne using up
too much magic trying to Finite Hannah, rather than the Most Ancient
Blade drawing out all of her power to break the Protego.
*

1154 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

The rest of them had decided not to say anything about the bruises
under their robes until they could get some older girls to cast Episkey.
There were limits to what Daphne could talk around.
The whole thing, Susan thought, had been too close, much too close.
If the bully had so much as looked around the corner—if he’d taken a
moment to recast his Shielding Charm—
“We should stop,” said Susan, as soon as the seven of them had gotten
out of hearing range of the healer’s oﬃce. “We should stop doing this.”
For some reason, then, even though they were supposed to vote on
this sort of thing, everyone turned to look at General Granger.
The Sunshine General didn’t seem to see them looking at her, she
just strode on, gazing oﬀ straight ahead.
After a little while, Hermione Granger said, in a voice that sounded
thoughtful and a little sad, “Hannah said she didn’t want us to stop. I’m
not sure it’s right for us to... be less brave for her, than she is.”
All the other girls, except Susan, nodded at that.
“I think that’s got to be as bad as it gets,” said Parvati. “And we can
handle it. We’ve proved that now.”
Susan couldn’t think of anything to say to that. She didn’t think that
shrieking at the top of her lungs about blatant stupidity and DOOM
would be persuasive. And she couldn’t just leave the other girls, either.
Wasn’t it enough to be cursed with hard work, why did Huﬄepuﬀs have
to be loyal on top of everything else?
“By the way, Lavender,” said Padma. “What in the name of Merlin’s
underpants were you wearing back there?”
“My hero outﬁt,” said the Gryﬃndor girl.
Daphne sounded weary, as she spoke without turning her own head
from where she was plodding through the hall. “It’s the costume of the
Soldier of Gryﬃndor from the play Chronicles of the Lunarian Soldiers.”
“Did you Transﬁgure it?” said Parvati, looking puzzled. “But the
bully cast Finite on you—”
“Nope!” Lavender said. “It’s real! See, I just Transﬁgured my hero
outﬁt into a regular shirt and skirt beforehand, so all I had to do was cast
Finite on myself after I saw the bully. Do you want your own, Parvati? I
got mine made yesterday by Katarina and Joshua in sixth-year, for twelve
*

1155 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Sickles—”
“I think,” General Granger said in a careful voice, “that would make
us all look a little silly.”
“Well,” said Lavender, “we should vote on whether to—”
“I think,” General Granger said, “that no matter what anyone votes,
I’m not going to be caught dead wearing one of those costumes—”
Susan ignored the argument. She was trying to think up some sort
of clever strategy for being less doomed.

**
*
The whole Great Hall went silent, even if only for a moment, as the
seven of them walked into lunch.
Then the applause started.
It was scattered, not the massive applause of everyone applauding at
once. A lot of it came from the Gryﬃndor table, less from Huﬄepuﬀ
and Ravenclaw, and none from Slytherin.
Daphne felt her face tightening. She’d hoped —well, maybe after they
found a Gryﬃndor bully to stop and a Slytherin to rescue, her fellow
Slytherins would realize—
She looked at the Huﬄepuﬀ table.
Neville Longbottom was applauding with his hands held high above
his head, although he wasn’t smiling. Maybe he’d heard about Hannah,
or maybe he was wondering why Hannah wasn’t there.
Then, not quite able to help herself, she glanced toward the Head
Table.
Professor Sprout’s face was lined with concern. She and Professor
McGonagall were leaning their heads toward Headmaster Dumbledore,
who had a solemn look, and all their lips were moving quickly. Professor
Flitwick looked more resigned than anything else, and Quirrell, face
slack, was taking trembling stabs at his soup using a spoon gripped in a
ﬁst.
Professor Snape was looking directly at—
Her?
*

1156 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

Or—at Hermione Granger, standing next to her?
A small, thin smile crossed the Potions Master’s face, and he raised
his hands, brought them together once in a motion that was too slow
to be a real clap; and then the Potions Master turned back to his plate,
ignoring the conversations around him.
Daphne felt a little chill go down her spine, and she hastily turned to
walk toward the Slytherin table. Susan and Lavender and Parvati peeled
oﬀ from their group, heading toward the Huﬄepuﬀ and Gryﬃndor tables on the other side of the Great Hall.
It happened as they were passing the part of the Slytherin table where
the Slytherin Quidditch team sat.
That was when Hermione stumbled suddenly, stumbled hard like
she was being yanked oﬀ her feet, and went sprawling into the gap between where Marcus Flint and Lucian Bole sat, and there was a sad little
splutching sound as Hermione’s face ended up in Flint’s plate of steak
and mashed potatoes.
Everything seemed to happen too quickly then, or maybe it was just
Daphne herself who was thinking too slow, as Flint let out a bellow of
indignation and his hand yanked Hermione back and threw her into
the Ravenclaw table, and she bounced oﬀ a student’s back and collapsed
onto the ground—
The quiet spread out in ripples.
Hermione pushed herself up on her hands, though she didn’t get all
the way to her feet, Daphne could see that her whole body was shaking,
and that her face was still covered with mashed potatoes with scattered
pieces of steak embedded like carbuncles.
For a long moment, nobody spoke, nobody moved. Like nobody
in the whole Great Hall could imagine, any more than Daphne could,
what happened next.
Then Flint’s powerful voice, the voice of the Slytherin Captain that
bellowed commands on the Quidditch pitch, said in a dangerous rumble,
“You ruined my food, girl.”
Another moment of frozen silence. Hermione’s head—Daphne
could see it trembling—turned to look at the Slytherin Quidditch Captain.
*

1157 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

“Apologize to me,” said Flint.
Harry Potter started to push himself up from the Ravenclaw table,
and then stopped abruptly, halfway to his feet, as if he’d just thought of
something—
Then ﬁve other people stood up from the Ravenclaw table.
All of the Slytherin Quidditch team stood up, their wands coming
into their hands, and then students stood up at the Gryﬃndor table and
at the Huﬄepuﬀ table and without thinking Daphne turned to look at
the Head Table and she saw that the Headmaster was still sitting down,
watching, just watching, Dumbledore was just watching and he had one
hand out as though to restrain Professor McGonagall—in just one second
someone would shout a spell and then it would be too late, why wasn’t
the Headmaster doing anything—
And a voice said, “My apologies.”
Daphne turned back to look, her mouth gaping open in absolute
shock.
“Scourgify,” said that smooth voice, and the mashed potatoes vanished from Hermione’s face, revealing the Ravenclaw’s surprised expression as Draco Malfoy approached her, sheathed his wand again, and then
knelt to one knee beside her and oﬀered her a hand.
“Sorry about that, Miss Granger,” said Draco Malfoy’s polite voice.
“I guess someone thought they were being funny.”
Hermione took Draco’s hand, and Daphne suddenly realized what
was about to happen—
But Draco Malfoy didn’t raise Hermione halfway up and then drop
her.
He just pulled her to her feet.
“Thanks,” said Hermione.
“You’re welcome,” Draco Malfoy said in a loud voice, not looking to
either side to see where all four Houses of Hogwarts were staring at him
in total shock. “Just remember, being cunning and ambitious doesn’t
mean you have to be like that.”
And then Draco Malfoy went back to his seat at the Slytherin bench
and sat down like he hadn’t—he hadn’t just—he’d just—
Hermione went to the nearest empty place at the Ravenclaw bench
*

1158 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

and sat down.
A number of other people, rather slowly, sat down.
“Daphne?” said Tracey. “Are you all right?”

**
*
Draco’s heart was hammering in his chest so hard he worried it might explode right out of his chest in a shower of blood, like that curse Amycus
Carrow had used once on a puppy.
Draco’s face stayed completely controlled, because he knew (it’d been
drilled into him over and over) that if he showed the slightest sign of the
fear he was feeling, his Housemates would rip him apart like a swarm of
Acromantulas.
There’d been no time to check with Harry Potter, no time to plot, no
time to think, just the instant of realizing that the time to start rescuing
Slytherin’s reputation was right then.
From all sides of the long Slytherin table, angry faces stared at Draco.
But they were outnumbered by the faces that just looked puzzled.
“All right, I give up,” said a sixth-year boy that Draco didn’t recognize, sitting across from him and two places to his right. “Why did you
do that, Malfoy?”
Although his mouth was very dry, Draco didn’t swallow. That
would have been a sign of fear. Instead he took a bite of carrots, which
had the most moisture of anything on his plate, and chewed and swallowed, thinking as rapidly as he could.
“You know,” Draco said, making his voice as cutting as he could—
as his heart thumped even harder in his chest, as everyone around him
stopped talking to listen—“there’s probably some way to make Slytherin
look even worse than attacking eight ﬁrst-year girls from all four Houses
who are working together to stop bullies, but I can’t think of how. This
way we get the beneﬁt of what Greengrass is doing.”
The puzzled faces stayed puzzled.
“What?” said the sixth-year boy, and “Wait, what beneﬁt?” said a ﬁfthyear girl sitting to his right.
*

1159 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

“It makes Slytherin House look better,” said Draco.
The Slytherins around him were giving him quizzical gazes like he’d
just tried to explain algebra.
“Look better to who?” said the sixth-year boy.
“But you just helped a mudblood,” said the ﬁfth-year girl. “How’s
that supposed to look good?”
Draco’s throat closed up. His brain was experiencing a hideous malfunction during which it couldn’t think of anything to say except the
truth—
Then, “It’s probably some kind of tremendously clever scheme Malfoy’s got going,” said a ﬁfth-year boy. “You know, like in The Tragedy
of Light, where everything that looks like a setback is part of the plot.
And it ends with Granger’s head on a stick and nobody suspecting that
it was him.”
“That makes sense,” someone said from further down the table, and
there was a lot of nodding.

**
*
“Do you know what the boss’s up to?” Vincent muttered in an undertone.
Gregory Goyle didn’t reply. In his mind he could hear very clearly
his master’s voice, saying, I can’t believe I believed every word of that, the
day the rumor had started about Salazar Slytherin showing Potter and
Granger where to ﬁnd bullies.
“Mr. Goyle?” whispered Vincent.
Gregory Goyle’s lips shaped the words, Oh no, but no sound came
out.

**
*
Hermione had left lunch early that day, for some reason she hadn’t felt
hungry. Those few seconds of horrible humiliation had kept burning
through her mind, over and over, the feeling of her face squishing into
the mashed potatoes and then being thrown through the air and then the
Slytherin’s boy’s voice saying ‘Apologize to me’... it might have been the
*

1160 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

ﬁrst time in her whole life that she’d felt like hating someone. The boy
who’d thrown her (Marcus Flint, they’d said his name was) and whoever
had cast the tripping Jinx on her in the ﬁrst place... she’d felt it, for one
horrible instant she’d wanted to go tell Harry that if he started getting
creative on her behalf, she wouldn’t object.
She hadn’t been a minute out of the Great Hall before she’d heard the
sound of running feet behind, and turned to see Daphne racing toward
her.
And listened to what her Sunshine Soldier had to say...
“Don’t you understand?” Daphne’s voice was barely below a shriek.
“Just because someone’s nice to you doesn’t mean they’re your friend!
He’s Draco Malfoy! His father’s a Death Eater, all the parents of all his
friends are Death Eaters—Nott, Goyle, Crabbe, everyone around him, do
you get it? They all despise Muggleborns, they want everyone like you
to die, they think you’re good for nothing but being a sacriﬁce in horrible
Dark rituals! Draco is the next Lord Malfoy, he’s been raised from birth
to hate you and he’s been raised from birth to lie!” Daphne’s gray-green
eyes stared ﬁercely at her, demanding assent and understanding.
“He—” Hermione said falteringly. She remembered the rooftop, the
awful jolt as she started to fall, Draco Malfoy’s hand grabbing hers and
holding it so hard that she’d had bruises afterward. She’d had to tell
him twice before he ﬁnally let her fall. “Maybe Draco Malfoy isn’t like
them—”
Daphne’s whisper was almost a scream. “If he doesn’t end up doing
you ten times as hard as he just helped you, his life is over, do you understand? I mean Lucius Malfoy would literally disinherit him! D’you
know what the chance is that he’s not up to something?”
“Tiny?” said Hermione in a small voice.
“Zero!” hissed Daphne. “I mean none! I mean less than zero! I mean
the chance is so small that you couldn’t ﬁnd it with three Magnifying
Charms and a Point-Me spell and—and—and an ancient map and a centaur prophet! Everyone in Slytherin knows he’s plotting to do something to you and doesn’t want to be suspected, I heard someone say he
was seen pointing his wand at you just before you tripped—don’t you
see? This is all part of Malfoy’s plan!”
*

1161

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

**
*
Draco sat eating his steak with roasted cauliﬂower ﬂorets and Ashwinder
sauce (it wasn’t made from real Ashwinder eggs, it just tasted like ﬁre),
trying not to laugh and trying not to cry.
He’d heard about plausible deniability, but hadn’t realized how much
it mattered until he found that Malfoys didn’t have any.
“You want to know my plot?” said Draco. “Here’s my plot. I’m not
going to do anything and then the next time people think I’m plotting
something, they won’t be sure.”
“Huh...” said the ﬁfth-year boy. “I don’t think I believe you, that
doesn’t sound cunning enough to be really it—”
“That’s what he wants you to think,” said the ﬁfth-year girl.

**
*
“Albus,” Minerva said dangerously, “did you plan all this?”

**
*
“Well, if I did snap my ﬁngers under the table, I wouldn’t just tell you
that—”

**
*
The Defense Professor’s quavering hand dropped his spoon into the soup
again.

**
*
“What do you mean, set you up?” said Millicent. The two of them were
sitting cross-legged on Daphne’s bed, having come there straight from
the Great Hall after lunch. “With my Seer’s eyes that stare through
Time Itself, I saw you winning.”
*

1162 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

Daphne stared at Millicent, her own merely mortal eyes rather narrowed at the moment. “That boy was expecting us.”
“Well, yeah!” said Millicent. “Everyone knows you’re hunting bullies!”
“Hannah got hit by a really painful hex,” Daphne said. “She had to
visit a healer, Millicent! If we’re friends you should’ve warned me!”
“Look, Daphne, I told you—” The Slytherin girl paused, as if trying
to remember something, and then said, “I mean, I told you, what I See
has to come to pass. If I try to change it, if anyone tries to change it, really
terrible, awful, no good, extremely bad things will happen. And then
it’ll come to pass anyway. If I See you getting beaten up, I can’t tell you
that, because then you’d try to not go, and then —” Millicent stopped.
“And then?” Daphne said skeptically. “I mean, what happens if we
just don’t go?”
“I don’t know!” said Millicent. “But it probably makes being eaten
by Lethifolds look like a tea party!”
“Look, even I know that’s not how prophecies work,” Daphne said,
then paused. “At least prophecies don’t work like that in plays...” Admittedly, there were all sorts of tragedies where trying to avoid a prophecy
made it happen, or where, on the other hand, trying to go along with
a prophecy was the only reason why it happened. But you could make
prophecies happen your own way if you were clever enough; or someone who loved you enough could take your place; or with enough eﬀort
it was possible to break a prophecy outright... Then again, in plays the
Seers never remembered what they Saw, either...
Millicent must have seen Daphne’s hesitation, because the other girl
started looking a little more conﬁdent. “Well,” Millicent said sharply,
“this isn’t a play! Look, I’ll tell you if I See it being a hard battle or an
easy one. But that’s all I can do, you understand? And if I say ‘hard’ you
can’t not show up! Or—or—” Millicent’s eyes rolled back in her head,
and she intoned hollowly, “Those who try to cheat their destinies will come
to sad and gloomy ends—”

**
*
*

1163 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

Professor Sprout shook her head, her face looking tight.
“But—” said Susan. “But you helped Harry Potter that one time—”
“And it was made quite clear to me,” Professor Sprout said in a voice
that sounded like someone was using a Shrinking Charm to squeeze her
throat, “that it was Professor Snape’s job, and not mine, to keep order
in Slytherin House—Miss Bones, please, you don’t have to do this if—”
“Yes, I do have to,” Susan said unhappily. “I’m a Huﬄepuﬀ, we have
to be loyal.”

**
*
“A mysterious parchment under your pillow?” said Harry Potter, looking up from where he was sitting, in the Quieted nook where they were
studying. Then the boy’s green eyes narrowed. “It wasn’t from Santa
Claus, was it?”
Pause.
“Okay,” said Hermione. “I’m not going to ask, and you’re not going
to tell me, and we’re both going to pretend you never said that and I don’t
know anything about it—”

**
*
Susan approached the table as soon as the older girl was alone, glancing
around the Huﬄepuﬀ common room to make sure nobody was watching (the way Auntie had taught her to do it, so that it wouldn’t be obvious that she was looking).
“Hey, Susie,” said the seventh-year Huﬄepuﬀ. “Do you already need
more—”
“Can I please talk to you privately for a bit?” Susan said.

**
*
Jaime Astorga, seventh-year of Slytherin, and until recently considered a
promising upstart on the youth dueling circuit, stood ramrod straight in
Professor Snape’s oﬃce, with his teeth clenched tight and sweat trickling
down his spine.
*

1164 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VII:
PLAUSIBLE DENIABILIT Y

*
*

*

“I distinctly recall,” said the Head of his House in a sardonic drawl,
“that I warned you, and a number of others this very morning, that there
were certain ﬁrst-year girls who might prove annoying, if a ﬁghter were
incautious and allowed himself to be taken by surprise.”
Professor Snape stalked in a slow circle around him.
“I—” said Jaime, as more sweat beaded on his forehead. He knew
how ridiculous it sounded, how much of a pathetic excuse. “Sir, they
shouldn’t have been able to—” One ﬁrst-year-girl shouldn’t have been
able to break his Protego, no matter what sort of ancient Charm she
used—Greengrass must have had help—
But it was very clear that his Head of House wouldn’t believe that.
“Oh, I quite agree,” murmured Snape in a low tone, instinct with
menace. “They shouldn’t have. I begin to wonder if Mr. Malfoy, whatever his plotting, has a point, Astorga. It cannot be good for the repute of Slytherin’s House if our ﬁghters, rather than demonstrating their
strength, lose to little girls!” Snape’s voice had risen. “It is well that you
had the good taste to be defeated by a little girl who is a fellow Slytherin
of a Noble House, Astorga, or I would deduct points from you myself!”
Jaime Astorga’s ﬁsts clenched at his side, but he couldn’t think of a
thing to say.
It was some time before Jaime Astorga was allowed to leave the presence of his Head of House.
And afterward, only the walls, the ﬂoor, and the ceiling saw Severus
Snape’s smile.

**
*
That evening Draco was visited by his father’s owl, Tanaxu, who wasn’t
green but only because there weren’t such things as green owls. The best
Father had been able to ﬁnd was an owl of the purest silver feathers, with
great luminous green eyes, and a beak as sharp and cruel as any snake’s
fang. The parchment wrapped around Tanaxu’s leg was short and to the
point:
What are you doing, my son?
The parchment that Draco sent back was equally short, and it said,
*

1165 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-TWO

*
*

*

I am trying to stop harm done to Slytherin’s reputation, father.
In as much time as it took for an owl to ﬂy from Hogwarts to Malfoy
Manor and back again, the family owl bore another message to Draco,
and this one said only:
What are you really doing?
Draco stared at the parchment he’d unwrapped from the owl’s leg.
His hands trembled, as he held up the parchment to the light of his ﬁreplace. Five words, carved in black ink, shouldn’t have been scarier than
death.
There wasn’t very much time to think. Father knew exactly how
long it took for a message to go from Malfoy Manor to Hogwarts and
back again; he would know if Draco delayed to compose a careful lie.
But Draco still waited until his hand stopped trembling, before he
wrote his reply, the only answer he’d thought of that Father might accept.
I am preparing for the next war.
Draco wrapped that parchment around the owl’s leg and tied it, and
then sent Tanaxu winging out from his room, through the halls of Hogwarts, into the night.
He waited, but no reply came.

*

1166 *

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y-THREE

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
PART VIII:
THE SACRED AND THE
MUNDANE
he red jet of ﬁre took Hannah full in the face, ﬂipping her end-over-heels
and smacking her head straight into the stone wall, where her pale face
seemed to linger for an instant, framed by ﬂying strands of brown-golden
hair, before she collapsed to the ground in a heap of robes, as the third and
ﬁnal volley of blazing green spirals brought down their foe’s Shield Charm.
The March days marched by, ﬁlled with lectures and study and homework, breakfast and lunch and dinner.
The Gryﬃndor boy stared at the eight of them, tension in every line of his
body’s frame, his face working soundlessly; and then his hands released their
clenched grasp on the Slytherin boy’s lapels, and he walked away without
anyone saying a word. (Well, Lavender almost said a word—her mouth was
just opening in indignation, maybe because she hadn’t gotten a chance to
declaim her speech—but luckily Hermione spotted it and made the gesture
that meant shut up.
Then there was sleeping, of course. You wouldn’t want to forget
about sleeping just because it seemed so normal.
“Innervate!” said the young voice of Susan Bones, and Hermione’s eyes
ﬂew open and her lips drew in air with a gasp, her lungs feeling heavy like

T

*

1167 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

there was a huge weight resting on her chest. Beside her, Hannah was already sitting up, holding her head in her hands and grimacing. Daphne had
warned them that this would be a ‘hard’ ﬁght, creating a certain trepidation
in Hermione, and indeed in all of them. Except maybe Susan, who’d just
shown up at the appointed meeting-time, and walked alongside them without speaking, and fought the seventh-year bully until she was the last girl
standing. Maybe the Gryﬃndor had been reluctant to ﬁght the last daughter
of Bones, or maybe Susan had just gotten very lucky; at any rate, when Hermione had tried to sit up again, she’d realized that her chest had felt heavy
because there was, in fact, a rather large body sprawled on top of her.
And you wouldn’t want to forget about magic either, even if the actual moment of casting a spell only formed a very small part of your
day. It was the whole point of Hogwarts, after all.
“Okay, how about if we all ride around on skateboards?” said Lavender.
“We could get places faster than walking. And we’d look really awesome on
skateboards, Muggle artifacts may not be as fast as broomsticks but they look
cooler—we should vote on it—”
As for the remaining fractions of time, you would ﬁll that according
to your nature: gossip about upper-year romances, or books and study
sessions.
Hermione reached out a trembling hand to grasp her copy of Hogwarts:
A History from where it had fallen, the ever-comforting book only a pace
distant from where she herself had ended up on the ﬂoor, after the red-robed
upper-year girl had “bumped” her into a wall. And then the older Gryﬃndor
witch had walked away without a look back, only a whispered “Salazar’s—”
and a word that hurt her more than anything the Slytherins said about mudbloods, ‘mudblood’ was just a strange wizarding word but Hermione knew
the word the Gryﬃndor had said. She couldn’t get used to it, she just couldn’t
get used to being hated. It still hurt just as much every time it happened, and
somehow it hurt even more coming from the Gryﬃndors who were supposed to be the good ones.
Harry had divided up eight of his soldiers among the other armies,
as ordered; he’d voluntarily given up two Chaotic Lieutenants, sending
Dean Thomas to Dragon Army and then trading Seamus Finnigan to
her for Blaise Zabini, who Harry had said was being “underutilized”
*

1168 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VIII:
THE SACRED AND THE MUNDANE

*
*

*

in Sunshine. Lavender had elected to join most of sphew in Sunshine;
Tracey had decided to stay with Chaos.
“So you can work your charms on General Potter?” said Lavender, as
Hermione ignored both of them as hard as she could. “I’ve got to say, Traces,
I think our Sunshine General has him pretty well sewn up by now—you’d
have better luck convincing Hermione that the three of you should have one
of those, you know, arrangements—”
Nobody had ﬁgured out yet what Draco Malfoy was plotting.
“Certain?” said Harry Potter, sounding rather reluctant. “You know a
rationalist isn’t ever certain of anything, Hermione, not even that two and
two make four. I can’t actually read Malfoy’s mind, and if I could, I couldn’t
be certain he wasn’t a perfect Occlumens. All I can say is that based on what
I’ve seen of Malfoy, it’s a lot more plausible than Daphne Greengrass thinks,
that he actually is trying to show the Slytherins a better way. We should...
we really should try to go along with that, Hermione.”
(Well, Harry seemed to think Draco Malfoy was a good guy. But
then the trouble was that Harry also tended to trust people like Professor
Quirrell.)

**
*
“Professor Quirrell,” Harry said, “I’m worried about the hatred
Slytherin House seems to be developing for Hermione Granger.”
They were sitting in the Defense Professor’s oﬃce, Harry sitting
far back from the teacher’s desk (and the sense of pending disaster was
still noticeable, even then), the empty bookcase still framing Professor
Quirrell’s balding head. The cup balanced on Harry’s thigh was ﬁlled
with Professor Quirrell’s obscure, probably-expensive Chinese tea, and
it said something about the way Harry had been thinking lately that he’d
needed to make a conscious decision to drink it.
“And this concerns me for what reason?” said Professor Quirrell,
sipping his tea.
“Yes, well,” said Harry, “I’m just going to ignore that—oh, stop that,
Professor Quirrell, you’ve been plotting to restore Slytherin House’s reputation since at least the ﬁrst Friday of this year.”
*

1169 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

There might have been a tiny crack of a smile, at the edges of those
thin pale lips; and then again, there might not have been. “I think
Slytherin’s House will do well enough in the end, Mr. Potter, regardless of the fate of one girl. But I do agree that the present outlook is
not favorable for your little friend. The bullies of two Houses, many
of them with powerful and well-connected families, see Miss Granger
as a threat to their reputation and a shame to their pride. As powerful a motive as that is to hurt her, it pales compared to the raw envy
of the Gryﬃndors, who see an outsider gaining the laurels of heroism
which they have dreamed of since childhood.” Now the smile on Professor Quirrell’s lips was deﬁnite, though slight. “And then there are
those of Slytherin House who hear that Salazar Slytherin’s ghost has
abandoned them to favor a mudblood. I wonder if you can even conceive, Mr. Potter, of how such as they would react? Those who do not
believe it would cheerfully kill Miss Granger for the insult. And as for
those Slytherins who wonder deep down, in some quiet place within
themselves, if it might perhaps be true... their inner panic is something
scarcely to be contemplated.” Professor Quirrell sipped his tea equably.
“When you are more experienced, Mr. Potter, you will see such consequences in advance of your plotting. As it stands, you are being ill-served
by your willful ignorance of all human nature you deem unpleasant.”
Harry sipped his own tea.
“Ah...” said Harry. “Professor Quirrell... help?”
“I already oﬀered Miss Granger my help,” said Professor Quirrell,
“as soon as I foresaw what would develop. My student told me, in polite
terms, to stay out of her business. Nor would she tell you anything
diﬀerent, I expect. As I have little to truly gain or lose in this matter, I
hardly intend to press the point.” The Defense Professor shrugged, his
teacup held steady in the exactly-right polite grip, so that the surface of
the liquid did not even ripple as Professor Quirrell leaned back within his
chair. “Do not worry too much, Mr. Potter. Emotions run high around
Miss Granger, but she is in less danger than you might imagine. When
you are older, you will learn that the ﬁrst and foremost thing which any
ordinary person does is nothing.”

*

1170 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VIII:
THE SACRED AND THE MUNDANE

*
*

*

**
*
The envelope which the Slytherin System had delivered to Daphne at
lunch was unsigned, as always; the parchment within named a time and
a place and said, simply, “Hard.”
That wasn’t what had concerned Daphne. What had concerned
Daphne was that Millicent didn’t seem to be looking in her or Tracey’s
direction at lunch that day. She’d just stared straight ahead at her plate
and eaten. Millicent had looked up just once that Daphne saw, in the
direction of the Huﬄepuﬀ table, and then looked quickly back down
again; though Daphne was too far away to see the expression on Millicent’s face, since Millicent had sat down far away from her and Tracey.
Daphne had thought about that during lunch, with a sick feeling in
her stomach unlike anything she’d felt before, and which had caused her
to stop eating halfway through her ﬁrst plate.
What I See has to come to pass... it probably makes being eaten by Lethifolds look like a tea party...
It wasn’t any conscious decision that Daphne made, nothing like
Slytherins were supposed to do, no weighing of the beneﬁts to herself.
Instead—
Daphne told Hannah and Susan and everyone, that her informant
had warned her that the next bully was going to target Huﬄepuﬀs in
particular, and that the bully planned to risk the teachers’ wrath in order
to really hurt either Hannah or Susan, like seriously, and the two of them
needed to stay out of this one.
Hannah had agreed to stay out of it.
Susan had—

**
*
“What are you doing here?” yelled General Granger, though it was sort
of a yell and a whisper at the same time.
Susan’s round face didn’t change, like the Huﬄepuﬀ girl had suddenly developed the sort of experienced blankness that Daphne’s own
Mother used. “Am I here, really?” Susan said calmly.
*

1171

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

“You said you wouldn’t come!”
“Did I say that?” said Susan. She ﬂipped her wand casually in one
hand, leaning against the stone wall of the corridor where they were
waiting, her reddish-brown hair somehow arranging itself in perfect order against the yellow trim of her witch’s robes. “I wonder why. Maybe
I didn’t want Hannah to get any strange ideas. Huﬄepuﬀ loyalty, you
know.”
“If you don’t leave,” said the Sunshine General, “I’ll call a mission
abort, and we’ll all go back to our study halls, Miss Bones!”
“Hey!” said Lavender. “We didn’t vote on—”
“That’s ﬁne by me,” said Susan, who was keeping a steady gaze on the
other end of the corridor where it merged into the tiled hallway where
they’d been told to expect the bully. “I’ll just stay here myself, then.”
“Why—” said Daphne. Her heart was in her throat. If I try to change
it, if anyone tries to change it, really terrible, awful, no good, extremely bad
things will happen. And then it’ll come to pass anyway... “Why are you
doing this?”
“It’s not like me,” said Susan. “I know. But—” Susan shrugged. “People don’t always behave like themselves, you know.”
They pleaded.
They begged.
Susan didn’t even say anything anymore, she just kept watching,
waiting.
Daphne was nearly crying, she kept wondering if she’d caused this,
if trying to change Fate was making this happen worse—
“Daphne,” said Hermione, her voice sounding much higher than
usual, “go get a teacher. Run.”
Daphne spun on her heels and started to pelt down the other direction of the stony corridor, and then she realized, and she turned back to
where all the other girls except Susan were watching her go, and Daphne,
feeling like she was about to throw up, said, “I can’t...”
“What?” said Hermione.
“I think it gets worse every time you try to ﬁght it,” said Daphne.
That was how it worked in plays, sometimes.
Hermione stared at her, and then Hermione said, “Padma.”
*

1172 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VIII:
THE SACRED AND THE MUNDANE

*
*

*

The other Ravenclaw girl just tore right out of there without arguing.
Daphne watched her go, knowing that Padma wasn’t as good a runner
as her, and now wondering if maybe that would turn out to be the only
reason why help would come too late...
“Bullies are here,” Susan said laconically. “Huh, they’ve got a
hostage.”
They all whirled, and looked, and saw—
Three older bullies, Daphne’s eyes recognized Reese Belka who was a
top lieutenant in one of the seventh-year armies, and Randolph Lee who
was number two in the Hogwarts dueling club, and worst of all, Robert
Jugson III, in his sixth year, whose father was almost certainly a Death
Eater.
All three were surrounded by Shielding Charms, blue hazes that
glowed beneath the surface in ribbons of other color and showed occasional faceting above, multi-layered shields like the three of them
thought they were ﬁghting serious duelists and had expended energy
accordingly.
And behind them, bound and supported by glowing ropes, was Hannah Abbott. Her eyes were wide and panicked and her mouth was moving, though they couldn’t hear anything through the Quietus they’d put
up earlier.
Then Jugson made an oﬀhand gesture with his wand, and the glowing
ropes ﬂung Hannah at them, there was a small pop as Hannah’s body
blew through the Quieting barrier, Susan’s wand was instantly pointing
at Hannah and Susan’s voice muttered “Wingardium Leviosa”—
“Run!” screamed Hannah, as she was gently lowered to the ground.
But the corridor behind them and in front of them was now blocked
with a glowing gray ﬁeld, a barrier spell that Daphne didn’t recognize.
“Do I need to explain what this is about?” Lee said with false joviality. The seventh-year duelist was sporting a smile that didn’t reach his
eyes. “Well, just in case, you little inconveniences, and that includes you
Miss Greengrass, you’ve been quite enough trouble and you’ve told quite
enough lies. We brought your little friend just to make sure everyone
knew we got all of you—though I suppose the other Ravenclaw girl is
hiding around a corner or clinging to the ceiling somewhere? Well, no
*

1173 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

matter. This is your—”
“Enough talk,” said Robert Jugson III, “time for pain,” and raised his
wand. “Cluthe!”
Simultaneously Susan pointed her wand and said “Prismatis!” and a
small rainbow sphere formed in midair almost instantly, the miniature
barrier so condensed and bright that it stayed intact even as Jugson’s hex
hit it and bounced oﬀ toward Belka, whose wand ﬂashed to swat away
the dark bolt; and then a moment later the many-colored blaze was gone.
Daphne’s eyes went wide for a moment; she’d never thought of using
a Prismatic Sphere like that—
“Jugsy, honey?” said Belka. Her lips widened in a vicious smile. “I
thought we discussed this. First we beat them, then we play.”
“P-please,” said Hermione Granger in a faltering voice, “let them go—
I, I, I promise I’ll—”
“Oh, really,” said Lee in an annoyed tone. “Are you about to oﬀer to
turn yourself over if we let the others go? We’ve got all of you, now.”
Jugson smiled, then. “It could be funny,” said the sixth-year junior
Death Eater, softly and with menace. “How about if you lick my shoes,
mudblood, and one of your friends can go? Pick whichever one you like
best, leave the others to get hurt.”
“Nope,” said the young voice of Susan Bones, “not going to happen,”
and with a blindingly fast motion the Huﬄepuﬀ girl leapt leftward just
as a red stunbolt erupted from Belka’s wand, Daphne could hardly see
the movement as Susan seemed to hit the corridor wall and then bounce
oﬀ it like she was a rubber ball and her legs smashed into Jugson’s face,
it didn’t go through the shield but the sixth-year went sprawling backward with the impact and Susan followed him downward and her foot
stamped down on the boy’s wand arm, again being repelled by the shield,
“Elmekia!” shouted Lee and Parvati shouted “Prismatis!” and the rainbow wall formed but the ﬁery blue blast passed right through it like it
wasn’t even there, the bolt missed Susan by inches, there was a whirlwind of motion that Daphne couldn’t follow during which Belka had
her feet knocked out from under her, but the older witch just rolled
back to a stand and then—
Daphne saw it coming, and her lips started to mouth “Pris—” but it
*

1174 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VIII:
THE SACRED AND THE MUNDANE

*
*

*

was already too late.
Three blasts of brilliance slammed into Susan at once, she had her
wand raised as though she could counter them and there was a white ﬂash
as the hexes struck the magical wood, but then Susan’s legs convulsed and
sent her ﬂying into a corridor wall. Her head hit with a strange cracking
sound, and then Susan fell down and lay motionless with her head at an
odd-seeming angle, her wand still clutched in one outstretched hand.
There was a moment of frozen silence.
Parvati scrambled over to where Susan lay, pressed a thumb over the
pulse point on Susan’s wrist, and then—then slowly, tremblingly, Parvati
rose to her feet, her eyes huge—
“Vitalis revelio,” said Lee just as Parvati opened her mouth, and Susan’s body was surrounded a warm red glow. Now the seventh-year boy
really was grinning. “Probably just a broken collarbone, I’d say. Nice
try, though.”
“Merlin, they are tricky,” said Jugson.
“You had me going for a second there, dearies.” The seventh-year girl
wasn’t smiling at all.
“Tonare!” screamed Daphne, raising her wand above her head and
focusing harder than she ever had in her life. “Rava calvaria! Lucis—”
She didn’t even see the hex that got her.

**
*
Hermione felt the jolt of Innervation bringing her awake, and out of
some intuitive strategism she didn’t roll to her feet right away; it had
been a completely hopeless battle and she didn’t know what she could
do but some instinct told her that leaping to her feet wasn’t it.
Just a crack, Hermione opened her eyes, and the thin rays of light
that entered them showed Parvati backing away from all three bullies,
the last girl standing that Hermione could see.
And her eyes also showed Tracey fallen not far away from her, and
Hermione’s wand was still in her hand; and so, desperately hoping the
Slytherin girl would show more sense than she usually did, Hermione
*

1175 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

made the wand movements as subtly as she could, and hardly moving
her lips, whispered, “Innervate.”
Hermione felt the spell working, but Tracey didn’t move. Hermione
hoped it was because Tracey was being cunning, and waiting to...
What could they do?
Hermione didn’t know, and the panic that had waited through the
moments of ﬁghting was starting to eat her up inside now that she was
still, now that she was trying to think, now that she could see that it was
all absolutely hopeless.
That was when Hermione heard a thud, and though it was out of her
ﬁeld of vision now, she knew that Parvati had fallen.
A moment of silence came, and passed.
“Now what?” said the voice of the scary-soft boy.
“Now we wake up the mudblood,” said the precise voice of the
scary-formal boy, “and ﬁnd out who’s really behind them, not Salazar
Slytherin’s ghost.”
“No, dears,” said the voice of the scary-sweet girl, “ﬁrst we bind them
all very securely—”
And then there was a sound like lightning and thunder and Hermione’s eyes widened in shock before she could stop herself, and in her
widened ﬁeld of vision she saw the scary-soft boy convulsing as yellow
arcs of energy crawled over him like giant blazing worms. His wand
ﬂew out of his hand as he collapsed to the ground, twitching, and then
a moment later he lay still.
“Is everyone else asleep now?” said a voice. “Good.”
Susan Bones rose from the ﬂoor near where the scary-soft boy had
stood, neck still oddly bent. Then she rolled her head around her shoulders, a casual loose motion, and her head was straight again.
The round-faced ﬁrst-year girl stood facing the remaining two bullies
with one hand cocked on her hip.
Grinning.
And surrounded by faceted blue haze.
“Polyjuice!” spat the bully-girl.
“Polyﬂuis Reverso!” roared the remaining boy bully.
Something like the form of a mirrored scarf spat out of his wand—
*

1176 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VIII:
THE SACRED AND THE MUNDANE

*
*

*

Passed without resistance through the haze surrounding Susan—
For an instant, she glowed in a strange mirror-color, like a reﬂection
of herself—
And then the glow faded.
The young girl still stood there, hand on her hip.
“Wrong,” said Susan.
“And this is the truth,” said Susan. “In case nobody ever told you—”
In her small hand a wand rose up, blurred by the blue haze surrounding it.
“You don’t mess with the ‘Puﬀs,” said Susan, and with a grey ﬂash
so bright it hurt Hermione’s half-closed eyes, the real battle started.
It went on for a while.
Some of the ceiling got melted.
The girl-bully tried to cry a truce, that they would leave and take Jugson with them, and Susan roared out the syllables of a curse Hermione
recognized as Abi-Dalzim’s Horrid Wilting which was illegal in seven
countries.
Eventually the girl-bully lay unconscious and unawakenable on the
ground, and the last boy-bully had ﬂed leaving his companions’ bodies
behind, and Susan was leaned over against one wall, covered in sweat and
her scorched robes soaked through with wet spots, gasping for breath,
and clutching at her right shoulder using her left hand.
After a while Susan straightened up, and turned to look back at
where her fellow witches were sleeping on the ﬂoor.
Well, they should’ve been sleeping on the ﬂoor.
Lavender was already sitting up with eyes as wide as watermelons.
“That...” said Lavender.
“Was...” said Tracey.
“What?” said Hermione.
“I mean, what?” said Parvati.
“Cool!” said Lavender.
“Oh, hell,” said Susan Bones. Her face had already looked a little
pale beneath the sweat, and now it was getting paler, looking almost
frighteningly white. “Ah... could I convince you that you hallucinated
all that?”
*

1177 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

There was a rapid exchange of glances. Hermione looked at Parvati,
Parvati looked at Lavender, Lavender brieﬂy locked gazes with Tracey.
The four of them looked back at Susan and shook their heads.
“Oh, hell,” said Susan again. “Look I’ll be back in a few minutes but
I’ve really got to go now please don’t say anything bye!”
And Susan ran out into the hallway, moving surprisingly fast, before
anyone could say another word.
“No, seriously, what?” said Parvati.
“Innervate,” said Hermione, pointing her wand at Daphne, whose
body she hadn’t been able to see before; and Lavender pointed her wand
at Hannah’s body and said the same.
Hannah’s eyes opened and she tried frantically to roll to her feet, but
collapsed to the ground halfway through.
“It’s okay, Hannah!” said Lavender. “We won.”
“We what?” said Hannah from her little heap on the ﬂoor.
Daphne hadn’t stirred, but Hermione could see her chest rising and
falling, and the breathing rhythm looked normal enough. “I think she’s
okay,” said Hermione, “but—” She took a moment to swallow, her
mouth was still dry. This had all gotten way, way, way out of hand.
“I think we ought to take Daphne to Madam Pomfrey’s...”
“Sure, sure, just give me a second here and I’ll probably be ﬁne,” said
Parvati.
“Excuse me,” Hannah said in a tone that was polite, but ﬁrm. “How
did we win? And why does the ceiling look all melty?”
There was a pause.
“Susan did it,” said Tracey.
“Yeah,” said Parvati, voice only slightly shaky as she stood up and
started to brush oﬀ her red-trimmed robes, “it turns out that Susan Bones
is the Heir of Huﬄepuﬀ and she’s opened up the long-lost entrance to
Helga Huﬄepuﬀ’s Chamber of Hard Work and Practice.”
“Huh?” said Hannah, who was feeling over herself as if to make sure
all her body parts were still there. “I thought that was just something
Professor Sprout says to teach us an Important Moral Lesson—Susan is?”
Slowly, Hermione was beginning to feel a bit more together. It hadn’t
really been more than thirty seconds of extreme terror, at least not the
*

1178 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VIII:
THE SACRED AND THE MUNDANE

*
*

*

parts she’d been conscious for. “Actually,” Hermione said carefully, as
her mind started to work again, “I’m pretty sure that is just something
Professor Sprout says, it wasn’t in Hogwarts: A History or anywhere else
I’ve read—”
“She’s a double witch!” shouted Tracey, her voice so high it cracked.
“She is! She’s one of them! She’s been this whole time!”
“What?” yelled Parvati, twisting around to look at Tracey. “That is
the looniest thing—”
“Of course!” said Lavender, now all the way on her feet and starting
to bounce up and down with excitement. “I should’ve realized!”
“Susan’s a what?” said Hermione.
“A double witch!” said Tracey.
“You see,” said Lavender, speaking very rapidly, “There’ve always
been stories, about these children who are born as super magicians who
can cast spells no one else can, and there’s a whole secret school hidden
inside Hogwarts with classes that only they can see and go to—”
“Those are just stories!” yelled Parvati. “That’s not how real life
works! I mean, sure, I read those books too—”
“Just a minute, please,” said Hermione. Maybe her mind was feeling
a little slow after all. “You mean even though you already get to go to a
magical school and everything, you still want to go to a double magical
school?”
Lavender looked at her, puzzled. “What?” said Lavender. “Who
wouldn’t want to have super extra magical powers? It would be like this
whole amazing destiny and everything! It’d mean you were special!”
Hannah nodded to that, looking up from where she’d crawled to
Daphne’s side and was checking the girl for broken bones. “I wish I
was a double witch,” Hannah said, and then, sounding a little sadder,
“though I don’t believe there is any such thing, really... what did you see
Susan do, exactly? I mean, are you sure you weren’t just seeing things
after getting stunned?”
Hermione truly, truly couldn’t ﬁnd any words at this point.
“Oh, no,” said Tracey. The Slytherin girl spun around to look at the
entrance to the corridor, her robes ﬂuttering around her. “Oh no! We’ve
got to get out of here! We’ve got to get away before Susan comes back
*

1179 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

with someone who can Super-Memory-Charm us!”
“Susan wouldn’t do that!” said Parvati. “I mean, if there even was —”
“What’s going on here?” roared a high-pitched squeaky voice, as Professor Flitwick stormed into the partially melted corridor like a small,
dangerously compressed package of pure academic fury, an ashen-faced
Padma gasping along behind him.

**
*
“What happened?” Susan blurted to the girl who looked exactly like her,
except for the scorched robes damp with sweat.
“Ooh, great question!” said the other Susan Bones as she rapidly
skinned oﬀ what was left of her borrowed clothes. A moment later
the girl began to Metamorphose back into her more accustomed form
of Nymphadora Tonks. “Sorry but I couldn’t think of anything myself
so you’ve got about three minutes to decide on an answer to that—”

**
*
As Daphne Greengrass observed afterward with some acidity, the ﬂaw
in Hermione’s cunning plan to make sure that House points were taken
evenly from all four Houses if they got caught, was that it didn’t work
on detentions.
They’d all agreed to keep their mouths shut about Susan’s mysterious powers—even Tracey, after Susan threatened to have her SuperMemory-Charmed if she didn’t promise. Unfortunately, they discovered at dinnertime that someone had forgotten to tell the bullies about
their agreement, and also that Susan Bones had sacriﬁced her soul to
dreadful forbidden powers which now inhabited the hulk of her body
and that was why they’d all gotten detention.
“Hermione?” Harry Potter said to her from beside her at the dinner
table, his voice very tentative. “Please don’t take oﬀense, and I’ll understand if you say it’s none of my business, but I think all this is starting
to spin out of control.”
* 1180 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION VIII:
THE SACRED AND THE MUNDANE

*
*

*

Hermione went on mashing the slice of chocolate cake on her plate
into a seamless mush of cake and icing. “Yes,” Hermione said, her
voice might have been a little acerbic, “that was what I said to Professor Flitwick while I was apologizing to him, that I knew things had
gotten out of hand, and he yelled: Really, Miss Granger? Do you think?
in a squeak so loud that my ears caught on ﬁre. I mean my ears actually
caught on ﬁre. Professor Flitwick had to put them out again.”
Harry had put his hand to his forehead. “Excuse me,” Harry said.
His face was perfectly straight. “Sometimes I still have a little trouble
getting used to that sort of thing. Hey, Hermione, remember when we
were young and naive and we still thought the world was a relatively
understandable place?”
Hermione put her fork down and looked at him for a moment. “Do
you sometimes wish you were a Muggle, Harry?”
“Huh?” said Harry. “Well, of course not! I mean, even if I was a
Muggle, I’d probably have tried someday to take over the worrrrlllll—”
as Hermione gave him a look and the boy hastily swallowed the word
and said, “I mean optimize of course, you know that’s what I really mean,
Hermione! My point is, it’s not like my goals would change one way or
another. But with magic it’s going to be a lot easier to get things done
than if I had to do stuﬀ using only the Muggle capability set. If you
think about it logically, that’s why I’m going to Hogwarts instead of just
ignoring all this and studying for a career in nanotechnology.”
Hermione, having ﬁnished hand-crafting her Chocolate Cake Sauce,
began to dip her carrots in it and eat them.
“Why do you ask?” said Harry. “Do you wish you were back in the
Muggle world?”
“Not exactly,” Hermione said, as she crunched into both the carrot
and the chocolate. “I was just, well, feeling strange about having wanted
to be a witch... Did you want to be a wizard when you were little?”
“Of course,” Harry said promptly. “I also wanted psychic powers
and super-strength and adamantium-reinforced bones and my own ﬂying
castle and sometimes I felt sad that I might have to settle for just being a
famous scientist and an astronaut.”
Hermione nodded. “You know,” she said softly, “I think the witches
*

1181 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-THREE

*
*

*

and wizards who grow up here don’t really appreciate magic properly...”
“Well, of course they don’t,” Harry said, “that’s what gives us our
advantage. Isn’t that obvious? I mean seriously, that was bloody obvious
to me within ﬁve minutes of walking into Diagon Alley.” There was a
puzzled look on the boy’s face, like he couldn’t understand why she was
paying attention to something so ordinary.

*

1182 *

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y-FOUR

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
PART IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS
arry walked forward a step, then another step, until a sense of unease began to pervade him, a disquiet in his nerves.
He said nothing, lifted no hand; the pervading sense of unease would
say it for him.
From behind the closed door of the oﬃce came a whisper, carrying
through the door as though no door were present.
“It is not my oﬃce hours,” said that cold whisper, “nor yet the time
of our meeting. I take ten Quirrell points from you, and be glad it is not
more.”
Harry stayed calm. Going through Azkaban had recalibrated his
scale of emotional disturbances; and losing a House point, which had
formerly rated ﬁve out of ten, now lay somewhere around zero point
three. Harry’s voice was likewise level, as he said, “You made a testable
prediction and it was falsiﬁed, Professor. I only wished to note that.”
As Harry turned to go, he heard the door opening behind him, and
he swung back around in some surprise.
Professor Quirrell was leaning back in his chair, his head lolling back
against its rest, as a parchment ﬂoated before him. Both the Defense
Professor’s hands rested limply on the desk, as though nerveless. He
might have been a corpse, excepting that the ice-blue eyes still moved,
back and forth, back and forth.

H

*

1183 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

The parchment vanished, and was replaced by another so quickly it
was like the material had only ﬂickered.
Then the lips moved as well. “And from this,” whispered the lips,
“you infer what, Mr. Potter?”
Harry was shaken by the sight, but his voice stayed even as he said,
“That ordinary people do not always do nothing, and that Hermione
Granger is in more danger from Slytherin House than you thought.”
The lips curved, ever so barely. “So you think I have failed in my
grasp of human nature. But that is hardly the only possibility, boy. Do
you see the other?”
Harry furrowed his brows as he stared at the Defense Professor.
“I tire of this,” the Defense Professor whispered. “You will stand
there until you see it for yourself, or else leave.” As though Harry had
stopped existing, the Defense Professor’s eyes looked back to the parchment, once more scanning back and forth.
It was six parchments later that Harry saw it, and said out loud, “You
think your prediction failed because there was some other factor at work
which was not in your model. Some reason why Slytherin House hates
Hermione more than you realized. Like when the orbital calculations
for Uranus were wrong, and the problem wasn’t in Newton’s Laws, it
was that they didn’t know about Neptune—”
The parchment vanished, and was not replaced. The head rose from
its lolling position then, facing Harry more directly, and the voice which
issued forth was quiet, but not toneless. “I think, boy,” Professor Quirrell said softly, but in something approaching his normal voice, “that
if all Slytherin House hated her so much, I would have seen it. And
yet three formidable ﬁghters of that House did something rather than
nothing, at risk and at cost to themselves. What force could have moved
them, or willed their motion?” The icy blue glitter of the Defense Professor’s eyes met Harry’s own gaze. “Some hand possessed of inﬂuence
within Slytherin, perhaps. Then how would that hand have beneﬁted
itself by harm done to the girl and her followers?”
“Um...” said Harry. “It would have to be someone threatened by
Hermione somehow, or someone who would get the credit if she was
hurt? I don’t know anyone who ﬁts that proﬁle, but then I don’t know
*

1184 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

much about anyone in Slytherin outside ﬁrst-year.” The thought was
also coming to Harry that deducing a hidden mastermind from a single
mildly-unexpected attack seemed like insuﬃcient evidence to support
the prior improbability of the theory; but then it was Professor Quirrell
who was doing the deducing...
The Defense Professor was just looking at Harry, eyelids slightly
lowered as though in impatience.
“And yes,” said Harry, “I am sure that Draco Malfoy isn’t behind it.”
A hiss of outward air like a sigh. “He is the son of Lucius Malfoy,
trained to the most exacting standards. Whatever you have seen of him,
even in what seem to be unguarded moments when his mask slips and
you trust that you have seen the truth beneath, even that may all be part
of the face he chooses to show you.”
Only if Draco successfully cast the Patronus Charm as part of keeping
up the act. But Harry didn’t say that, of course; instead he just grinned
slightly, and said, “So either you’ve really never read Draco’s mind, or
that’s just what you want me to think.”
There was a pause. One of the hands turned over, beckoned a ﬁnger.
Harry stepped into the room. The door closed behind him.
“That was not something you should have said aloud in human
speech,” said Professor Quirrell’s soft voice. “Legilimency, on Malfoy’s
heir? Did Lucius Malfoy learn of it, he would have me assassinated outright.”
“He would try,” Harry said. It should have won a crinkle of Professor Quirrell’s eyes, but the Defense Professor’s face was unmoving. “But
sorry.”
When the Defense Professor spoke again, his voice had once more
become a cold whisper. “I suppose I could, and pity the assassin.” His
head fell back against the chair, lolled to one side, the eyes no longer
meeting Harry’s. “But these small games hardly hold my interest as they
stand. Add Legilimency, and it ceases to be a game at all.”
Harry hardly knew what to say. He’d seen Professor Quirrell in an
angry mood once or twice before, but this seemed emptier, and Harry
didn’t know what to say to it. What’s bothering you, Professor Quirrell?
he could not ask.
*

1185 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

“What does hold your interest?” Harry said a few moments later, after
he’d worked it out as a safer-seeming strategy for redirecting Professor
Quirrell’s attention to positive things. Citing experimental results about
keeping a gratitude journal as a strategy for improving life happiness
didn’t seem like it would be taken well.
“I will tell you what does not hold my interest,” said that icy whisper.
“Grading Ministry-mandated essays does not hold my interest, Mr. Potter. But I have undertaken the position of Defense Professor at Hogwarts, and I will see it through to its end.” Another parchment appeared
in front of Professor Quirrell’s head, and his eyes began to scan it. “Reese
Belka held a high position in my armies before her folly. I will oﬀer her
the chance to stay rather than being expelled, if she tells me exactly of
the forces which moved her. And I shall make clear to her what will
happen if she lies. I do permit myself to read faces.”
The Defense Professor’s ﬁnger pointed past Harry, toward the door.
“But whether you were wrong about human nature,” Harry said,
“or whether there’s some extra force at work in Slytherin House—either
way, Hermione Granger is in more danger than you predicted. Last time
it was three strong ﬁghters, so what happens after—”
“She wishes not my help, nor yours,” said a soft cold voice. “I no
longer ﬁnd your concerns so entertaining as I once did, Mr. Potter. Go.”

**
*
Somehow, even though they were all equals and she deﬁnitely wasn’t in
charge, it was always Hermione who ended up speaking ﬁrst in this sort
of situation.
The four tables of Hogwarts, the four Houses having breakfast, were
glancing over at where they, the eight members of sphew, had gathered
oﬀ to one side.
Professor Flitwick was also staring sternly at all of them from the
Head Table. Hermione wasn’t looking there, but she could feel Professor Flitwick’s gaze on the back of her neck. Literally feel it. It was really
creepy.
*

1186 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

“Why’d you tell Tracey you wanted to talk to us, Mr. Potter?” said
Hermione, her tone crisp.
“Professor Quirrell expelled Reese Belka from her army last night,”
Harry Potter said. “And from all her other after-school Defense activities. Do any of you see the signiﬁcance of that? Miss Greengrass?
Padma?”
Harry’s eyes swept over them, as Hermione exchanged a puzzled
glance with Padma, and Daphne shook her head.
“Well,” Harry said quietly, “I wouldn’t actually expect you to. But
what it means is that you’re in danger, and I don’t know how much danger.” The boy squared his shoulders, looking straight into Hermione’s
eyes. “I wasn’t going to say this, but... I just wanted to oﬀer to put you
under whatever protection I could give. Make it clear to everyone that
anyone who messes with you, is messing with the Boy-Who-Lived.”
“Harry!” said Hermione sharply. “You know I don’t want—”
“Some of them are my friends too, Hermione.” Harry didn’t take his
eyes from hers. “And it’s their decision, not yours. Padma? You told me
that I owed you no debt for what I did, and that’s the sort of thing a
friend would say.”
Hermione broke her gaze from Harry, to look at where Padma was
shaking her head.
“Lavender?” Harry said. “You fought well in my army, and I’ll ﬁght
for you if you wish it.”
“Thank you, General!” Lavender said crisply. “I mean Mr. Potter.
No, though. I’m a heroine and a Gryﬃndor, and I can ﬁght for myself.”
There was a pause.
“Parvati?” Harry said. “Susan? Hannah? Daphne? I don’t know any
of you so well, but it’s something I would oﬀer anyone who came to ask
it of me, I think.”
One by one, the other four girls shook their heads.
Hermione realized what was coming, then, but she didn’t see a single
thing she could do about it.
“And my loyal soldier, Chaotic Tracey?” said Harry Potter.
“Really?” gasped Tracey, oblivious to the stabbing glares that Hermione and every other girl were directing at her. Tracey’s hands ﬂew
*

1187 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

artfully to her cheeks, though she didn’t actually manage to blush, not
that Hermione could see; and her brown eyes were, if not shining, at
least opened very wide. “You’d do that? For me? I mean—I mean, of
course, absolutely, General Chaos—”

**
*
And so it was on that very morning that Harry Potter went over to the
Gryﬃndor table, and then the Slytherin table, and told both Houses
that anyone who hurt Tracey Davis, regardless of what she was doing at
the time, would, quote, learn the true meaning of Chaos, unquote.
It was with considerable restraint that Draco Malfoy managed to prevent himself from slamming his head repeatedly into his plate of toast.
They weren’t exactly scientists, the bullies of Hogwarts.
But even they, Draco knew, were going to want to test it.

**
*
The Society for the Promotion of Heroic Equality for Witches hadn’t
announced it, it didn’t seem like it would do any good to announce it.
But they had all quietly decided (or, in the case of Lavender, been shouted
into it by all seven other girls) to take a break from ﬁghting bullies for a
while, at least until their Heads of House weren’t looking at them quite
so sharply anymore, and older students had stopped bumping Hermione
into walls.
Daphne had told Millicent that they were taking a break.
And so it was with some puzzlement, a few days later, that Daphne
looked at the parchment delivered to her at lunch, drawn in a hand so
shaky it was almost unreadable, saying:
2 this afternoon at the top of the stairs going up from the library really
important everyone has to be there—Millicent
Daphne looked around, but she couldn’t see Millicent anywhere in
the Great Hall.
* 1188 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

“A message from your informant?” said Hermione, when Daphne
told her. “That’s odd— I didn’t—”
“You didn’t what?” said Daphne, after the Ravenclaw girl had
stopped in mid-sentence.
The Sunshine General shook her head and said, “Listen, Daphne, I
think we need to know where these messages come from before we keep
following them. Look at what happened last time, how could anyone
have known where those three bullies would be, unless they were in on
it?”
“I can’t say—” Daphne said. “I mean, I can’t say anything, but I know
where the messages come from, and I know how anyone can know.”
Hermione gave Daphne a look that, for a moment, made the Ravenclaw girl look scarily like Professor McGonagall.
“Uh huh,” said Hermione. “And do you know how Susan suddenly
turned into Supergirl?”
Daphne shook her head, and said, “No, but I think it might be really important that if we get a message saying we should be somewhere,
everyone has to be there.” Daphne hadn’t seen what had happened with
Susan, after Daphne had tried to avert the prophecy by keeping Susan
away. But she’d been told about it afterward, and now Daphne was afraid
that...
She might have possibly...
Might possibly have Broken Something...
“Uh huh,” said Hermione, who was doing the McGonagall Stare
again.

**
*
Nobody seemed to know where it had started, who had started it. If
you’d tried tracing it afterward, tracked it back word by word and mutter
by mutter, you probably would have found it all going in a huge circle.
Peregrine Derrick was tapped on his shoulder as he left Potions that
morning.
Jaime Astorga heard a whisper in his ear at lunch.
Robert Jugson III discovered a tiny folded note under his plate.
*

1189 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

Carl Sloper overheard two older Gryﬃndors whispering about it,
and they gave him signiﬁcant glances as they walked past.
Nobody seemed to know where the word began, or who had ﬁrst
spoken it, but it named the place, and it named the time, and it said that
the color would be white.

**
*
“Every single one of you had better be absolutely clear on this,” said
Susan Bones. The Huﬄepuﬀ girl, or whatever strange power had possessed her, wasn’t even pretending to act normal anymore. The roundfaced girl was striding through the halls with a ﬁrm, conﬁdent gait. “If
we get there and it’s just one bully, that’s ﬁne, you can ﬁght them the
regular way. My mysterious superpowers won’t activate if there are no
innocents in danger. But if ﬁve seventh-year bullies jump out of a closet,
you know what you do? That’s right, you run away and let me ﬁght
them. Finding a teacher is optional, the important thing is that you run
away as soon as I create an opening. In a ﬁght like that you are liabilities.
You are civilian targets I have to worry about protecting. So you will
get away as fast as possible and you will not try to do anything heroic or
so help me, the hour you get out of your healer’s beds I will personally
show up and kick your asses right back in. Are we all clear on that?”
“Yes,” squeaked most of the girls, though in Hannah’s case it came
out, “Yes, Lady Susan!”
“Don’t call me that,” snapped Susan. “And I don’t think I heard you,
Miss Brown! I’m warning you, I have friends who write plays and if
you do anything dumb, posterity will remember you as Lavender, the
Amazing Stupid Hostage.”
(Hermione was beginning to worry about just how many other Hogwarts students besides Harry had mysterious dark sides, and whether she
was likely to develop one if she kept hanging out with them.)
“Alright, Captain Bones,” said Lavender in an unusually respectful
tone, as they turned another corner along the shortest way to the library,
passing through a rather large corridor studded with six sets of double
* 1190 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

doors, three sets on either side. “Can I ask if there’s any way for me to
become a double witch?”
“Sign up for the Auror preparation program in your sixth year,” said
Susan. “It’s the next best thing. Oh, and if a famous Auror oﬀers to
oversee your summer internship, just ignore anyone who warns you that
he’s a terrible inﬂuence or that you’re almost certainly going to die.”
Lavender was nodding rapidly. “Got it, got it.”
(Padma, who hadn’t actually been there last time, was giving Susan
very skeptical looks.)
Then Susan suddenly stopped in place and her wand snapped up and
she said, “Protego Maximus!”
A jolt of adrenaline went through Hermione, she was instantly drawing her wand and spinning around—
But she couldn’t see anything wrong, through the greater blue haze
now surrounding them all.
The other girls, who had likewise pulled into formation, were also
looking puzzled.
“Sorry!” said Susan. “Sorry, girls. Give me a moment to check this
place out. Thinking of a certain person has just reminded me that this
hall we’re in right now, with all those doors, would be an excellent place
for an ambush.”
There was a moment of silence.
“Now,” said a harsh male voice, blurred into unidentiﬁability by a
buzzing undertone.
All six sets of double doors slammed open.
White robes ﬁled silently forward, all-concealing white robes without marks of House aﬃliation and white cloth hiding the faces beneath
the hoods. They marched out, and marched out, crowding the great corridor in numbers too high to count easily. Less than ﬁfty robes, probably. Certainly more than thirty. All of them already surrounded by
blue haze.
Susan said some Extremely Bad Words, so awful that at almost any
other time, Hermione would have noticed.
“That message!” Daphne cried in sudden horror. “It wasn’t from—”
“Millicent Bulstrode?” said the voice and its buzzing undertone.
*

1191 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

“No, it wasn’t. You see, Miss Greengrass, if the same girl sends oﬀ a
Slytherin message every day you ﬁght a bully, pretty soon someone else
will notice. We’ll have a talk with her after we’re done with you.”
“Miss Susan,” said Hannah in a voice just starting to quaver, “can you
be super enough to—”
Wands rose in many hands. There came a series of blinding ﬂashes
of green light, a massive volley of shieldbreakers, at the end of which
there was no more protective blue dome surrounding them, and Susan
had fallen to her knees, clutching her head.
Barriers of solid blackness had sprung into being at both ends of the
corridor. Behind the double doors that Hermione could see into, there
were only unused classrooms, very dead ends.
“No,” said the male voice with that buzz overlaid, “she can’t. In case
you haven’t noticed, you’ve gotten quite a lot of people very angry at
you and we have no intention of losing this time. All right everyone,
prepare to ﬁre.”
The wands around the perimeter aimed again, low enough that their
enemies wouldn’t hit each other if they missed.
And then another male voice, with a similar buzz accompanying it,
suddenly said “Homenum Revelio!”
An instant later there was another massive volley of shieldbreakers
and hexes, ﬁred on reﬂex at the suddenly revealed ﬁgure, shattering the
shields which had almost immediately begun to form around it—
And then, as that same ﬁgure fell to the ground, a stunned silence.
“Professor Snape?” said the second voice. “He’s the one who’s been
interfering?”
It was the Potions Master of Hogwarts who now lay unconscious on
the stone ﬂoor, the dirt-spotted robes stirring for a ﬁnal moment before
they settled in place, his fallen hand outstretched toward where his wand
was slowly rolling away.
“No,” said the ﬁrst male voice, now sounding a bit more uncertain.
Then it rallied, “No, that can’t possibly be it. He heard us passing the
word, of course, and came along to make sure nobody screwed it up
again. We’ll wake him up afterward and apologize and he’ll MemoryCharm the children so they don’t remember, he’s a Professor so he can
*

1192 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

do that. Anyway, we should make sure we’re really alone now. Veritas
Oculum!”
Fully two dozen diﬀerent Charms must have been spoken, then, but
no more invisible people showed up. One of them in particular made
Hermione’s heart sink; she recognized it as the Charm which had been
listed alongside the description of the True Cloak of Invisibility, which
would not reveal the Cloak, but would tell you whether it or certain
other artifacts were nearby.
“Girls?” whispered Susan. She was slowly pushing herself to her feet,
though Hermione could see her limbs swaying and quivering. “Girls,
I’m sorry for what I said before. If you’ve got anything clever and heroic
to try, you might as well try it.”
“Oh, yeah,” Tracey Davis said then, her voice trembling. “I almost
forgot.” The Slytherin girl raised her voice, and spoke.
“Hey, all of you!” yelled Tracey in a high-pitched shaky shout. “Hey,
are you planning to hurt me too?”
“Yes, actually,” said the buzzing voice of the leader. “We are.”
“I’m under Harry Potter’s protection, you know! Anyone who tries
to hurt me will learn the true meaning of Chaos! So are you going to let
me go?” It should have sounded deﬁant. It came out sounding terriﬁed.
There was a pause. Some of the hoods of the robes turned to face
each other, then turned back to face the girls.
“Hm...” said the buzzing male voice. “Hm... no.”
Tracey Davis put her wand away into her robes.
Slowly, deliberately, she raised her right hand high in the air, and
pressed her thumb and foreﬁngers together.
“Go ahead,” said that voice.
Tracey Davis snapped her ﬁngers.
There was a long, awful pause.
Nothing happened.
“Yes, well,” said the voice—
Tracey said, her voice sounding even higher and shakier, “Acathla,
mundatus sum.” Her hand, stretching up still further, snapped its ﬁngers
a second time.
A nameless chill went down Hermione’s spine then, a frisson of fear
*

1193 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

and disorientation like she’d just felt the ﬂoor tilt beneath her, threatening to spill her into some darkness lying beneath.
“What’s she—” began a buzzing female voice.
Tracey’s face looked pale, twisted with fear, but her lips moved,
spilled forth sound in a high chant, “Mabra, brahoring, mabra...”
A chill wind seemed to spring up within the conﬁnes of the corridor,
a dark breath that caressed their faces and touched their hands with ice.
“Fire at her on my count!” shouted the leading voice. “One, two,
three!” and maybe-forty voices roared spells, creating a huge concentric
array of ﬁery bolts that lit the wide corridor brighter than the Sun—
—for the short moment before the bolts struck and vanished upon
a dark red octagon that appeared in the air around the girls, and then
disappeared a moment later.
Hermione saw it, she saw it but she still couldn’t imagine it; she
couldn’t imagine a Shielding Charm that powerful, a spell that would
withstand an army.
And Tracey’s voice went on chanting, her voice sounding louder and
more conﬁdent, and her face screwed up like she was trying to remember
something very exactly.
“Shuﬄe, duﬄe, muzzle, muﬀ.
Fista, wista, mista-cuﬀ.”
Now all those present could feel it, heroines and bullies alike, the
sensation of some dark will pressing down on them, a tingling in the
air as something built and built and built. All the blue hazes around the
white robes, all the shielding spells, had died out without any visible hex
touching them. There were more ﬂashes of light as more desperate spells
were ﬁred, but they ﬁzzled out in midair like candle-ﬂames touching
water.
The black barriers at the two ends of the corridor had dissipated
like smoke beneath the growing pressure, but their evaporation revealed
the exits sealed, blocked by tiled slats of dark metal that looked stained
as though with blood; and as Tracey chanted “Lemarchand, Lament,
Lemarchand,” a dreadful blue light began to shine out from beneath the
*

1194 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

metal slats and between them; and the six sets of double doors slammed
shut all at once, as panicked white-robed bullies began to pound on them
and howl.
Then Tracey’s hand slashed to her left, and she cried “Khornath!”,
then her hand pointed below her and “Slaaneth!”, above her “Nurgolth!”,
and then, to her right, “Tzintchi!”
Tracey paused, took a deep breath; and Hermione found her voice
and cried, “Stop! Tracey, stop!”
But there was a strange wild smile on Tracey’s face. She raised her
hand still higher, and snapped her ﬁngers a third time; and when she
spoke again, beneath her high girlish voice there was an undertone as
though some lower chorus were chanting along with her.
“Darkness beyond darkness, deeper than pitchest black.
Buried beneath the ﬂow of time...
From darkness to darkness, your voice echoes in the emptiness.”
“What are you doing?” shrieked Parvati, and the Gryﬃndor girl stretched
out a hand as though to pull down the Slytherin, who was now starting
to ﬂoat upward into the air; and both Daphne and Susan grabbed Parvati’s arm at the same time and Daphne cried out, “Don’t, we don’t
know what will happen if the ritual is interrupted!”
“Well what happens if it gets completed?” screamed Hermione, as close
as she’d ever come to total brain meltdown.
Susan’s face was white as chalk, and she whispered, “I’m sorry, MadEye...”
And Tracey spoke on, her body ﬂoating higher and higher oﬀ the
ﬂoor, her black hair whipping wildly around her in the chill winds.
“You who know the gate, who are the gate, the key and guardian of the gate:
I bid you open the way for him, and manifest his power before me!”
The corridor was plunged then into utter darkness and silence, so that
only Tracey could be seen and heard, like there was nothing left in the
universe except her and the light illuminating her from some nameless
source.
*

1195 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

The shining girl raised her hand one ﬁnal time, and with dreadful
gravity, pressed her thumb and foreﬁnger together.
And within the darkness Hermione looked at Tracey’s face and saw
that the Slytherin girl’s eyes were now, to the exact shade, the green of
Harry Potter’s.
“Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres!
Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres!
Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres!”
There was a snap like thunder, and then—

**
*
Harry had chosen to assume a rather relaxed posture, as he sat in a low
chair before the mighty desk of the Headmaster of Hogwarts: one leg
cocked over his knee, and his arms sprawling casually to either side.
Harry was doing his best to disregard the noise from the surrounding
devices, although the one directly behind him that sounded like an owl
hooting desperately as it was put through a woodchipper was pretty difﬁcult to ignore.
“Harry,” the old wizard said from behind the desk, the aged voice
level as the blue eyes stared out at him from beneath the shining halfmoon spectacles. Headmaster Dumbledore had garbed himself in robes
of midnight purple; not true formal black, but dark enough to come
close indeed to deadly seriousness, as the wizarding world counted the
meaning of fashions. “Were you... responsible for this?”
“I cannot deny that my inﬂuence was at work,” Harry said.
The old wizard took oﬀ his glasses, leaned forward to stare at Harry
directly, blue eyes to green. “I will ask you one question,” the Headmaster said in a quiet voice. “Do you think that what you did today
was—appropriate?”
“They were bullies and they came to that hallway with the direct
intent of hurting Hermione Granger and seven other ﬁrst-year children,”
Harry said levelly. “If I am not too young for moral judgment, then
*

1196 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

neither are they. No, Headmaster, they didn’t deserve to die. But they
did deserve to be stripped naked and glued to the ceiling.”
The old wizard put his glasses back on. For the ﬁrst time that Harry
had seen of him, the Headmaster seemed to be at a loss for words. “As
Merlin himself is my witness,” said Dumbledore, “I haven’t the faintest
notion of how I ought to react to this.”
“That’s pretty much the eﬀect I was aiming for,” said Harry. He felt
like he ought to be whistling a merry tune, but unfortunately he had
never learned how to whistle reliably.
“I need not ask you who is directly responsible,” said the Headmaster. “Only three wizards within Hogwarts might be powerful enough.
I myself did not do it. Severus has assured me he was not involved.
And the third...” The Headmaster shook his head in some dismay. “You
loaned the Defense Professor your Cloak, Harry. I do not think that
was wise. For now that he has escaped detection by simple Charms, he
surely knows that it is a Deathly Hallow—if, indeed, he did not know
from its ﬁrst touch upon his ﬂesh.”
“Professor Quirrell had already deduced my possession of an invisibility cloak,” Harry said. “And knowing him, he has probably guessed
that it is a Deathly Hallow. But in this case, Headmaster, it so happens
that Professor Quirrell was under one of those face-concealing white
robes.”
There was another pause.
“How very cunning,” said the Headmaster. He leaned back in his
throne and sighed. “I have spoken to the Defense Professor. Just before
you, indeed. I did not quite know what to say. I told him that this was
not the approved Hogwarts policy for dealing with infractions of hallway discipline, and that I did not feel it was appropriate for a Hogwarts
professor to do what he had done.”
“And what did Professor Quirrell say to that?” said Harry, who was
not impressed with Hogwarts’s current policies for enforcing hallway
discipline.
The Headmaster wore a look of resignation. “He said: Fire me.”
Somehow Harry managed not to cheer out loud.
The Headmaster frowned. “But why did he do it, Harry?”
*

1197 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

“Because Professor Quirrell doesn’t like school bullies and I asked
very politely,” said Harry. And he was feeling bored and I thought this
might cheer him up. “Either that or it’s part of some incredibly deep
plot.”
The Headmaster rose up from behind the desk, began to pace back
and forth before the hatstand that held the Sorting Hat and the red slippers. “Harry, do you not feel that all of this has gotten a bit...”
“Awesome?” oﬀered Harry.
“Utterly and completely out of hand would say it better,” said Dumbledore. “I am not sure there has ever been a time in the whole history
of this school when things have become so, so... I don’t have a word for
this, Harry, because things have never become like this before, and so
no one has ever needed to invent a word for it.”
Harry would have tried to invent words to express how deeply complimented he felt, if he hadn’t been snerkling too hard to speak.
The Headmaster was regarding him with increasing graveness.
“Harry, do you understand at all why I ﬁnd these events concerning?”
“Honestly?” said Harry. “No, not really. I mean, of course Professor
McGonagall would object to anything that breaks up the dull monotony
of the Hogwarts school experience. But then Professor McGonagall
wouldn’t set a chicken on ﬁre.”
The frown lines deepened on Dumbledore’s wrinkled face. “That,
Harry, is not what disturbs me,” the Headmaster said quietly. “There
was a full battle fought in these halls!”
“Headmaster,” Harry said, trying to keep his voice carefully respectful, “Professor Quirrell and I did not choose for that battle to happen.
The bullies did that. We just decided to have the Light side win. I know
there are times where the boundaries of morality are uncertain, but in
this case the line separating the villains and the heroines was twenty meters tall and drawn in white ﬁre. Our intervention may have been weird,
but it certainly wasn’t wrong—”
Dumbledore had gone back to his desk, sat down in his padded
throne with a dull thump, and was now covering his face with both his
hands.
“Am I missing something here?” Harry said. “I thought you’d be se*

1198 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

cretly on our side, Headmaster. It was the Gryﬃndor thing to do. The
Weasley twins would approve, Fawkes would approve—” Harry glanced
at the golden perch, but it was empty; either the phoenix had more important things to do, or the Headmaster hadn’t invited him to today’s
meeting.
“That,” said the Headmaster in an old and tired and somewhat mufﬂed voice, “is precisely the problem, Harry. There is a reason why courageous young heroes are not put in charge of schools.”
“All right,” Harry said. He couldn’t quite keep the skepticism out of
his voice. “What am I missing this time?”
The old wizard lifted his head, his face now solemn, and calmer. “Listen, Harry,” said Dumbledore, “hear me well; for all who wield power
must learn this in time. Some things in this world are, indeed, truly
simple. If you pick up a stone and drop it again, the earth will be no
heavier for it, the stars will not move from their paths. I say this, Harry,
so that you know I am not pretending to be wise, when I tell you that
even as some things are simple, others are complex. There are greater
wizardries which leave marks upon the world, and marks upon those
who wield them, as a simple Charm would not. Those wizardries demand hesitation, consideration of consequence, a moment to weigh the
meaning of their marks. And yet the most intricate magics known to
me are simpler than the simplest soul. People, Harry, people are always
marked, by what they do and by what is done to them. Do you, then,
understand how to say, ‘Here is the line between hero and villain!’ is not
enough to say that what you did was right?”
“Headmaster,” Harry said evenly, “this is not a decision I made at
random. No, I don’t know what exact eﬀect this will have on every
single one of the bullies present. But if I always waited for perfect information before I acted, I would never do anything. When it comes to the
future psychological development of, say, Peregrine Derrick, beating up
eight ﬁrst-year girls probably wouldn’t have been good for him. And
it wasn’t enough to just stop them quietly and quickly, since then they
would just try again later; they had to see that there was a protective
power worth fearing.” Harry’s voice stayed level. “But of course, since I
am a good guy, I didn’t want to permanently injure them or even cause
*

1199 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

them any pain; and yet the penalty had to be enough to weigh on the
minds of anyone thinking about trying it again. So, after weighing the
expected outcomes as best I could with my boundedly rational intellect,
I thought it would be wisest to strip the bullies naked and glue them to
the ceiling.”
The young hero stared directly into the old wizard’s gaze, unﬂinching green eyes locked with the blue behind the spectacles.
And since I wasn’t there and didn’t do anything personally, there’s no
lawful way to punish me under the Hogwarts school rules; the only one who
acted was Professor Quirrell, and he’s ﬁreproof. And just breaking the rules
to get at me wouldn’t be a wise thing to do to the hero you’re grooming
to ﬁght Lord Voldemort... This time Harry actually had tried to think
through all the ramiﬁcations in advance, before he’d made the suggestion
to Professor Quirrell; and for once the Defense Professor hadn’t called
him a fool, just slowly smiled and then begun to laugh.
“I understand your intentions, Harry,” the old wizard said. “You
think you have taught the bullies of Hogwarts a lesson. But if Peregrine
Derrick could learn that lesson, he would not be Peregrine Derrick. He
will only be provoked more by what you do—it is not fair, it is not right,
but that is the way it is.” The old wizard closed his eyes, as though in
brief pain, and then opened them again. “Harry, the most painful truth
any hero must learn is that the right cannot, should not, must not win
every battle. All of this began when Miss Granger fought three older
enemies and won. If she had been content with this, the echoes of her
deed would have died away in time. Yet instead she banded together
with her classmates and raised her wand in open challenge to Peregrine
Derrick and all his kind; and his kind cannot but raise their own wands in
answer. So Jaime Astorga went hunting her, and in the natural course he
would have beaten her; it would have been a sad day, but it would have
ended there. There is not enough magic in eight ﬁrst-year witches all
together to defeat such a foe. But you could not accept that, Harry, could
not let Miss Granger learn her own lessons; and so you sent the Defense
Professor to watch over them invisibly, and pierce Astorga’s shields when
Daphne Greengrass struck at him—”
What? thought Harry.
* 1200 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

The old wizard went on speaking. “Each time you intervened,
Harry, it escalated matters further and yet further. Soon Miss Granger was facing Robert Jugson himself, the son of a Death Eater, with
two strong allies at his side. Painful indeed it would have been for her,
if Miss Granger had lost that battle. And yet again by your will and
Quirinus’s hand, this time shown more openly, she won.”
Harry was still struggling with the notion of the Defense Professor
watching invisibly over sphew, guarding the heroines from harm.
“And so,” the old wizard ﬁnished, “that is how we came to today,
Harry, to forty-four students attacking eight ﬁrst-year witches. A full
battle in these halls! I know it was not your intent, but you must accept
some measure of responsibility. Such things did not happen before you
came to this school, not through all my decades in Hogwarts; neither
when I was a student nor when I was a Professor.”
“Thank you very much,” Harry said evenly. “Though I think Professor Quirrell deserves more credit than me.”
The blue eyes widened. “Harry...”
“Those bullies were attacking victims long before this year,” Harry
said. Despite his best eﬀorts, his voice was starting to rise. “But nobody
seems to have taught the students that they’re allowed to ﬁght back. I
know it’s much harder to ignore a two-sided ﬁght than some helpless
victims getting hexed or almost pushed out of windows, but it’s not exactly worse, is it? I wish I’d read more of Godric Gryﬃndor’s writings
so I could quote him, there’s got to be something in there about this.
Open battle may be louder than the victims suﬀering in silence, it may
be harder to pretend that nothing is happening, but the ﬁnal result is
better—”
“No, it is not,” Dumbledore said. “It is not, Harry. To always ﬁght
the darkness, to never let evil pass unchallenged—that is not heroism,
but simple pride. Even Godric Gryﬃndor did not think that every war
was worth ﬁghting, though he went his whole life from one battle to
another.” The old wizard’s voice went quieter. “In truth, Harry, the
words you speak—they are not evil. No, not evil, and yet they have
frightened me. You are one who might someday wield great power, over
wizardry, over your fellow wizards. And if, come that day, you still
*

1201 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

think that evil must never pass unchallenged—” Now a note of real worry
had entered the Headmaster’s voice. “The world has grown more fragile
since the age when Hogwarts was raised; I fear it cannot bear the fury of
another Godric Gryﬃndor. And he was slower to his wrath than you.”
The old wizard shook his head. “You are too ready to ﬁght, Harry.
Much too ready to ﬁght, and Hogwarts itself is becoming a more violent
place around you.”
“Well,” Harry said carefully, after weighing his words. “I don’t know
if it will help to say this, but I think you’re getting the wrong impression of what I’m all about. I don’t like real ﬁghting either. It’s scary,
and violent, and somebody might get hurt. But I didn’t ﬁght today,
Headmaster.”
The Headmaster frowned. “You sent the Defense Professor in your
place—”
“Professor Quirrell didn’t do any ﬁghting either,” Harry said calmly.
“There wasn’t anyone there strong enough to ﬁght him. What happened
today wasn’t ﬁghting, it was winning.”
It was a while then before the old wizard spoke. “That may be as it
may be,” the Headmaster said, “but all these conﬂicts must end. I can
hear the strain in the air, and with each of these clashes, it rises. All
this must end, decisively and soon; you must not stand in the way of its
ending.”
The old wizard gestured toward the great oaken door of his oﬃce,
and Harry departed through it.

**
*
It was with some surprise that Harry stepped out from between the
huge grey gargoyles which had made way for him, and saw that Quirinus Quirrell was still slumped against the stone of the corridor wall, a
thick thread of spittle drooling from his slack mouth onto his Professorial robes, in just the same position he’d occupied when Harry had ﬁrst
gone up into the Headmaster’s oﬃce.
* 1202 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

Harry waited, but the slumped man didn’t rise up; and after long
awkward seconds, Harry began to walk down the corridor again.
“Mr. Potter?” came a soft call, after Harry had turned two corners;
a quiet voice carrying unnaturally through the halls.
When Harry had returned he found Professor Quirrell still slumped
against the wall, but the pale eyes now watched him with keen intelligence.
I’m sorry to have tired you out—
It was something that Harry couldn’t say. He’d noticed the correlation between the eﬀort Professor Quirrell expended and the time he
had to spend ‘resting’. But Harry had reasoned that if the eﬀort was
too painful or detrimental, surely Professor Quirrell would just say no.
Now Harry was wondering if that reasoning had actually been correct,
and if not, how to apologize...
The Defense Professor spoke in a quiet voice, the rest of the body
unmoving. “How went your meeting with the Headmaster, Mr. Potter?”
“I’m not sure,” Harry said. “Not the way I predicted. He seems to
believe the Light should lose a lot more often than I’d consider wise.
Plus I’m not sure he understands the diﬀerence between trying to ﬁght
and trying to win. It explains a lot, actually...” Harry hadn’t read much
about the Wizarding War, but he’d read enough to know that the good
guys probably had acquired a pretty accurate picture of who most of the
worst Death Eaters were, and hadn’t just owled them all hand grenades
over the course of ﬁve minutes.
A soft, soft laugh from the pale lips. “Dumbledore does not comprehend the enjoyment of winning, just as he does not comprehend the
enjoyment of the game. Tell me, Mr. Potter. Did you suggest this little
plan with the deliberate intention of relieving my tedium?”
“That was among my many motives,” Harry said, because some instinct had warned that he couldn’t just say Yes.
“Do you know,” the Defense Professor said in soft reﬂective tones,
“there are those who have tried to soften my darker moods, and those
who have indeed participated in brightening my day, but you are the ﬁrst
person ever to succeed in doing it deliberately?” The Defense Professor
seemed to straighten up from the wall with a peculiar motion which
* 1203 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

might have included magic as well as muscle; and the Defense Professor
began to walk away without a look back in Harry’s direction. Only a
single small gesture of one ﬁnger indicated that Harry was to follow.
“I particularly enjoyed that chant you composed for Miss Davis,” said
Professor Quirrell after they had walked a short distance. “Though you
might have been wiser to consult me in advance, before giving it to her to
memorize.” One hand bestirred itself to within the Defense Professor’s
robes and drew forth a wand, which traced a small gesture in the air, after
which all the faraway sounds of the castle Hogwarts fell silent. “Tell me
honestly, Mr. Potter, have you somehow acquired a familiarity with the
theory of Dark rituals? That is not the same as confessing an intent to
cast them; many wizards know the principles.”
“No...” Harry said slowly. He had decided some time ago against
trying to sneak into the Restricted Section of the Hogwarts library, for
much the same reason he’d decided a year earlier not to look up how
to make explosives out of common household materials. Harry prided
himself on at least having more sense than people thought he did.
“Oh?” said Professor Quirrell. The man was walking more normally
now, and the lips curved about in a peculiar smile. “Why, perhaps you
possess a natural talent for the ﬁeld, then.”
“Yes, well,” Harry said wearily. “I suppose Dr. Seuss also has a natural talent for Dark rituals, because the part about shuﬄe, duﬄe, muzzle,
muﬀ came from a children’s book called Bartholomew and the Oobleck—”
“No, not that part,” said Professor Quirrell. His voice grew a little stronger, took on some of its normal lecturing tone. “An ordinary
Charm, Mr. Potter, can be cast merely by speaking certain words, making precise motions of the wand, expending some of your own strength.
Even powerful spells may be invoked in this way, if the magic is eﬃcient as well as eﬃcacious. But with the greatest of magics, speech alone
does not suﬃce to give them structure. You must perform speciﬁc actions, make signiﬁcant choices. Nor is the temporary expenditure of
your own strength suﬃcient to set them in motion; a ritual requires
permanent sacriﬁce. The power of such a greater spell, compared to
ordinary Charms, can be like day compared to night. But many rituals—indeed, most—happen to demand at least one sacriﬁce which might
* 1204 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

inspire squeamishness. And so the entire ﬁeld of ritual magic, containing all the furthest and most interesting reaches of wizardry, is widely
regarded as Dark. With a few exceptions carved out by tradition, of
course.” Professor Quirrell’s voice took on a sardonic tinge. “The Unbreakable Vow is too useful to certain wealthy Houses to be outlawed
entirely—even though to bind a man’s will through all his days is indeed
a dread and terrible act, more fearsome than many lesser rituals that wizards shun. A cynic might conclude that which rituals are prohibited is
not so much a matter of morality, as habit. But I digress...” Professor
Quirrell made a brief coughing sound, a clearing of his throat. “The
Unbreakable Vow requires three participants and three sacriﬁces. The
one who receives the Unbreakable Vow must be one who could have
come to trust the Vower, but chooses instead to demand the Vow from
them, and they sacriﬁce that possibility of trust. The one who makes
the Vow must be someone who could have chosen to do what the Vow
demands of them, and they sacriﬁce that capacity for choice. And the
third wizard, the binder, permanently sacriﬁces a small portion of their
own magic, to sustain the Vow forever.”
“Ah,” Harry said. “I’d wondered why that spell wasn’t used all over
the place, every time two people have diﬃculty trusting each other...
although... why don’t wizards on their deathbeds charge money to bind
Unbreakable Vows, and use that to leave an inheritance for their children—”
“Because they are stupid,” said Professor Quirrell. “There are hundreds of useful rituals which could be performed if men had so much
sense; I could name twenty without stopping to draw breath. But in
any case, Mr. Potter, the thing about such rituals—whether or not you
choose to term them Dark—is that they are shaped to be magically eﬃcacious, not to appear impressive when performed. I suppose there is a
certain tendency for the more powerful rituals to require more dreadful
sacriﬁces. Even so, the most terrible ritual known to me demands only a
rope which has hanged a man and a sword which has slain a woman; and
that for a ritual which promised to summon Death itself—though what
is truly meant by that I do not know and do not care to discover, since it
was also said that the counterspell to dismiss Death had been lost. The
* 1205 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

most dread chant I have encountered does not sound even a hundredth
as fearsome as the chant you composed for Miss Davis. Those among
the bullies who had a passing familiarity with Dark rituals—and I am
certain that there were some—must have been terriﬁed beyond the capacity of words to describe. If there existed a true ritual which appeared
that impressive, Mr. Potter, it would melt the Earth.”
“Um,” said Harry.
Professor Quirrell’s lips twisted further. “Ah, but the truly amusing
thing was this. You see, Mr. Potter, the chant of every ritual names
that which is to be sacriﬁced, and that which is to be gained. The chant
which you gave to Miss Davis spoke, ﬁrst, of a darkness beyond darkness,
buried beneath the ﬂow of time, whose voice echoes in the emptiness,
which knows the gate, and is the gate. And the second thing spoken of,
Mr. Potter, was the manifestation of your own presence. And always,
in each element of the ritual, ﬁrst is named that which is sacriﬁced, and
then is said the use commanded of it.”
“I... see,” said Harry, as he trod through the halls of Hogwarts after
Professor Quirrell, following him toward the Defense Professor’s oﬃce.
“So my chant, the way I wrote it, implies that the Outer God, YogSothoth—”
“Was permanently sacriﬁced to fuel a ritual which but brieﬂy manifested your presence,” said Professor Quirrell. “I suppose we will discover tomorrow whether anyone took that seriously, when we read the
newspapers and see whether all the magical nations of the world are
banding together in a desperate eﬀort to seal oﬀ your incursion into our
reality.”
They walked on, as the Defense Professor began chuckling, odd
throaty sounds.
The two of them didn’t talk after that until they came to the Defense
Professor’s oﬃce, and then the man halted with his hand upon the door.
“It is a very strange thing,” the Defense Professor said, his voice now
soft again, almost inaudible. The man was not looking at Harry, and
Harry saw only his back. “A very strange thing... There was a time
when I would have sacriﬁced a ﬁnger from my wand hand, to work upon
the bullies of Hogwarts as we have worked upon them this day. To
* 1206 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

make them fear me as they now fear you, to have the deference of all the
students and the adoration of many, I would have given my ﬁnger for
that. You have everything now that I wanted then. All that I know of
human nature says that I should hate you. And yet I do not. It is a very
strange thing.”
It should have been a touching moment, but instead Harry felt a
coldness traveling down his spine, as though he were a little ﬁsh in the
sea, and some vast white shark had just looked him over and decided
after a visible hesitation not to eat him.
The man opened the door to Defense Professor’s oﬃce, and passed
within, and was gone.

**
*

Aftermath:
Her fellow Slytherins were looking at Daphne like... like they didn’t
have the faintest idea of how to look at her.
The Gryﬃndors were looking at her like they didn’t have the faintest
idea of how to look at her.
Showing no fear, Daphne Greengrass strode into the Potions classroom, wrapped in the imperious dignity of a Noble and Most Ancient
House. Inside she was feeling much the same way everyone else probably did.
It had been two hours since the What? when the What? had happened and Daphne’s brain was still going: What? What? What?
The classroom was quiet as they all waited for Professor Snape to
arrive. Lavender and Parvati sat near a cluster of other Gryﬃndors, surrounded by silent stares. The two of them were looking over each other’s
homework before class started, and nobody else was helping them or
talking to them. Even Lavender, who Daphne would have sworn could
never be fazed by anything, seemed subdued.
* 1207 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

Daphne sat down at her desk, and took Magical Draughts and Potions
out of her bag, and began looking over her own homework, doing her
very best to act normal. People stared at her, and said nothing—
A gasp went through the whole classroom. Girls and boys ﬂinched
back, leaning away from the door like they were stalks of wheat touched
by a gust of wind.
In the door stood Tracey Davis, wrapped in a black tattered cloak
which had been draped over her Hogwarts uniform.
Tracey walked slowly into the classroom, swaying slightly with each
step, looking like she was trying to drift. She sat down at her accustomed
desk, which happened to be right next to Daphne’s.
Slowly Tracey’s head turned to stare at Daphne.
“See?” the Slytherin girl said in a low, sepulchral tone. “I told you I’d
get him before she did.”
“What?” blurted Daphne, who immediately wished she hadn’t said
anything.
“I got Harry Potter before Granger did.” Tracey’s voice was still low,
but her eyes were gleaming with triumph. “See, Daphne, what General
Potter wants in a girl isn’t a pretty face or a pretty dress. He wants a
girl willing to channel his dread powers, that’s what he wants. Now I’m
his—and he’s mine!”
This announcement produced a frozen silence through the whole
classroom.
“Excuse me, Miss Davis,” said the cultured voice of Draco Malfoy,
who seemed unconcerned as he shuﬄed through his own Potions parchments. The other scion of a Most Ancient House didn’t so much as
glance up from his desk, even as everyone else turned to look at him.
“Did Harry Potter actually tell you that? Using those words?”
“Well, no...” Tracey said, and then her eyes ﬂashed angrily. “But
he’d better take me in, now that I’ve sacriﬁced my soul to him and everything!”
“You sacriﬁced your soul to Harry Potter?” gasped Millicent. There
was a clatter from the other side of the room as Ron Weasley dropped
his inkwell.
“Well, I’m pretty sure I did,” said Tracey, sounding brieﬂy uncertain
* 1208 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

before she rallied. “I mean, I looked at myself in a mirror and I look
paler now, and I can always feel darkness surrounding me, and I was a
conduit for his dread powers and everything... Daphne, you also saw
my eyes go green, right? I didn’t see it myself but that’s what I heard
afterward.”
There was a pause, broken only by the sounds of Ron Weasley trying
to clean up his desk.
“Daphne?” said Tracey.
“I don’t believe it,” said an angry voice. “There’s no way the next
Dark Lord would take you to be his bride!”
Slowly, and with considerable disbelief, heads turned to stare at Pansy
Parkinson.
“Hush, you,” said Tracey, “or I’ll...” The Slytherin girl paused. Then
Tracey’s voice went even lower, and she said, “Hush, you, or I’ll devour
your soul.”
“You can’t do that,” said Pansy, in the conﬁdent tones of a hen which
had worked out a perfectly good pecking order where she was at the top,
and wasn’t about to go updating that belief based on mere evidence.
Slowly, like she was trying to ﬂoat, Tracey got up from her desk.
There were more gasps. Daphne felt like she’d been Petriﬁed in place
within her chair.
“Tracey?” said Lavender in a small voice. “Please don’t do all that
again. Please?”
Now Pansy was showing deﬁnite nervousness as Tracey swayed toward her desk. “What d’you think you’re doing?” Pansy said, not quite
managing to sound indignant.
“I told you,” Tracey said menacingly. “I’m going to devour your
soul.”
Tracey bent down over Pansy, who sat frozen at her desk; and, with
their lips almost touching, made a loud inhaling noise.
“There!” said Tracey as she straightened. “I ate your soul.”
“No you didn’t!” said Pansy.
“Did too!” said Tracey.
There was a very slight pause—
“Merlin, she did!” cried Theodore Nott. “You look all pale now, and
* 1209 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FOUR

*
*

*

your eyes seem empty!”
“What?” screeched Pansy, turning pale. The girl leapt up from her
desk and began frantically rummaging through her bookbag. After
Pansy drew out a mirror and looked at herself, she turned even paler.
Daphne abandoned all pretense of aristocratic poise and let her head
fall to the desk with a dull thud, as she wondered whether going to the
same school as all the other important families was really worth going
to the same school as the Chaos Legion.
“Ooh, you’re in trouble now, Pansy,” said Seamus Finnigan. “I don’t
know exactly what happens when a Dementor Kisses you, but if Tracey
Davis kisses you that’s probably even worse.”
“I’ve heard about people without souls,” Dean Thomas said
gloomily. “They have to dress all in black, and they write awful poetry,
and nothing ever makes them happy. They’re all angsty.”
“I don’t want to be angsty!” cried Pansy.
“Too bad,” said Dean Thomas. “You’ve got to be, now that your
soul’s gone.”
Pansy turned, and stretched out a begging hand toward Draco Malfoy’s desk. “Draco!” she said pleadingly. “Mr. Malfoy! Please, make
Tracey give me back my soul!”
“I can’t,” said Tracey. “I ate it.”
“Make her throw it up!” yelled Pansy.
The heir of Malfoy had slumped forward, resting his head in both
hands, so that nobody could see his face. “Why is my life like this?” said
Draco Malfoy.
A wild babble of whispers started up as Tracey returned to her desk,
now smiling in satisfaction, while Pansy stood in the midst of the classroom, wringing her hands and tears starting from her eyes—
“Be. Quiet.”
The soft, lethal voice seemed to ﬁll the whole classroom as Professor
Snape stalked in through the door. His face was angrier than Daphne
had ever seen it, sending a jolt of genuine fear down her spine. Hastily
she looked down at her homework.
“Sit down, Parkinson,” the Potions Master hissed, “and you, Davis,
take oﬀ that ridiculous cloak—”
*

1210 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION IX
:
ESCALATION OF CONFLICTS

*
*

*

“Professor Snaaaaaape!” wailed Pansy Parkinson in tears. “Tracey ate
my sooouuul!”

*

1211

*

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y-FI V E

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
FINALE: RESPONSIBILIT Y
t was a looping, meandering alley in the midst of Hogwarts, wandering like a stray lock of hair; sometimes crossing itself, it seemed,
but you couldn’t ever get to the end if you gave into the temptation of
apparent shortcuts.
At the end of the tangle, six students leaned against rough stones,
robes black against the grey walls and trimmed in green, eyes darting
from one to each other. Torches burned in the windowless sconce, casting light to ward oﬀ the darkness and heat to ward oﬀ the chill of the
Slytherin dungeons.
“I am certain,” Reese Belka snapped, “absolutely certain, that was no
true ritual. Little ﬁrstie witches can’t do that kind of magic, and even
if they could, who’s ever heard of a Dark ritual which sacriﬁces a sealed
horror for—that?”
“Were you—” said Lucian Bole. “I mean—after that girl snapped her
ﬁngers—”
Belka’s glare should have melted him. “No,” she spat, “I was not.”
“That is, she wasn’t naked,” drawled Marcus Flint, his broad shoulders leaning back in apparent relaxation against the lumpy stone surface.
“Covered in chocolate frosting, yes, but not naked.”
“This day Potter has oﬀered great insult to our Houses,” said the grim
voice of Jaime Astorga.
“Yes, well, I’m sorry to be blunt,” Randolph Lee said evenly. The
seventh-year duelist rubbed at his chin, where a faint fuzz of beard had
been allowed to grow. “But when someone sticks you to the ceiling, it’s a

I

*

1213 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

message, Astorga. It’s a message which says: I’m an incredibly powerful
Dark Wizard who could’ve done anything to you I damn well pleased,
and I don’t care if your House is oﬀended, either.”
Robert Jugson III gave a soft, low laugh at this, a chuckle that sent
chills down several spines. “It makes you wonder if you picked the
wrong side, doesn’t it? I’ve heard tales about messages like that, sent
at the old Dark Lord’s bidding...”
“I’m not ready to kneel to Potter just yet,” said Astorga, staring hard
into Jugson’s eyes.
“Neither am I,” said Belka.
Jugson was holding his wand, and he turned it idly back and forth in
his ﬁngers, pointing it up and then downward. “Are you a Gryﬃndor
or a Slytherin?” said Jugson. “Everyone’s got a price. Everyone smart.”
This statement produced a moment of silence.
“Shouldn’t Malfoy be here?” Bole said tentatively.
Flint gave a dismissive ﬂick of his ﬁngers. “Whatever Malfoy’s plotting, he wants to put on an air of innocence. He can’t be seen missing at
the same time as us.”
“But everyone knows that already,” said Bole. “Even in the other
Houses.”
“Yes, very clumsy,” said Belka. She snorted. “Malfoy or no, he’s just
a little ﬁrstie and we don’t need him here.”
“I will owl my father,” Jugson said softly, “and he will speak to Lord
Malfoy himself—” Abruptly, Jugson stopped speaking.
“I don’t know about you, dearies,” Belka said with fake sweetness,
“but I don’t plan on running scared from a false ritual, and I’m not done
with Potter and his pet mudblood.”
Nobody answered. All their gazes were looking past her.
Slowly, Belka turned around to see what the others were staring at.
“You will do nothing,” hissed their Head of House. Severus Snape’s
face was enraged, when he spoke small spots of spittle ﬂew from his
mouth, further dotting his already-dirtied robes. “You fools have done
enough! You have embarrassed my House—lost to ﬁrst-years—now you
speak of embroiling noble Lords of the Wizengamot in your pathetic
childish squabbles? I shall deal with this matter. You will not embarrass
*

1214 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, FINALE:
RESPONSIBILIT Y

*
*

*

this House again, you will not risk embarrassing this House again! You
are done with ﬁghting witches, and if I hear otherwise—”

**
*
If you thought they’d be sitting next to each other at dinnertime, after
that, you’d be quite mistaken.
“What does she want from me?” came the plaintive cry of a boy who,
for all his extensive reading in the scientiﬁc literature, was still a bit naive
about certain things. “Did she want to get beaten up?”
The upper-year Ravenclaw boys who’d sat down next to him at the
dinner-table exchanged swift glances with each other until, by some unspoken protocol, the most experienced of their number spoke.
“Look,” said Arty Grey, the seventh-year who was leading in their
competition by three witches and a Defense Professor, “the thing you’ve
got to understand is, just because she’s angry doesn’t mean you lost
points. Miss Granger is angry because she got all frightened and you’re
there to be blamed, you understand? But at the same time, even though
she won’t admit it, she’ll be touched that her boyfriend went to such
ridiculous and frankly insane lengths to protect her.”
“This is not about points,” ground out Harry Potter, the words visibly escaping from between his clenched teeth. Dinner sat ignored on
the table in front of him. “This is about justice. And I. Am. Not. Her.
Boyfriend!”
This was met by a certain amount of sniggering from all present.
“Yeah, well,” said a sixth-year Ravenclaw boy, “I think after she kisses
you to bring you out of Dementation and you stick forty-four bullies to
the ceiling for her, we’ve gone way past ‘she’s not my girlfriend, really’
and into the question of what your kids will be like. Wow, that’s a scary
thought...” The Ravenclaw trailed oﬀ and then said, in a smaller voice,
“Please don’t look at me like that.”
“Look,” said Arty Grey, “I’m sorry to be blunt about this, but you
can have justice or you can have girls, you can’t have both at the same
time.” He clapped a companionable hand on Harry Potter’s shoulder.
*

1215 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

“You’ve got potential, kid, more potential than any wizard I’ve ever seen,
but you’ve got to learn how to use it, you know? Be a bit sweeter to
them, learn some spells to clean up that mess you call hair. Above all,
you need to hide your evilness better—not too well, but better. Nice
well-groomed boys get girls, and Dark Wizards also get girls, but nice
well-groomed boys suspected of being secretly Dark get more girls than
you can imagine—”
“Not interested,” Harry said ﬂatly, as he picked up the boy’s hand
from his shoulder and unceremoniously dropped it.
“But you will be,” said Arty Grey, his voice low and foreboding.
“Ah, you will be!”
Elsewhere along the same table—
“Romantic?” shrieked Hermione Granger, so loudly that some of the
girls next to her winced. “What part of that was romantic? He didn’t
ask! He never asks! He just sends ghosts after people and glues them to
ceilings and does whatever he wants with my life!”
“But don’t you see?” said a fourth-year witch. “It means that even
though he’s evil, he loves you!”
“You’re not helping,” said Penelope Clearwater a little further down
the table, but she was ignored. Several older witches had started toward
Hermione, after she’d sat down at the extreme opposite end of the table from Harry Potter, but then a swifter cloud of younger girls had
surrounded Hermione in an impenetrable barrier.
“Boys,” said Hermione Granger, “should not be allowed to love girls
without asking them ﬁrst! This is true in a number of ways and especially when it comes to gluing people to the ceiling!”
This was also ignored. “It’s just like a play!” sighed a third-year girl.
“A play?” said Hermione. “I’d like to see the play where anything
like this happens!”
“Oh,” said the third-year girl, “I was thinking of that really romantic
one where there’s this very nice, sweet boy who makes a Floo call, only
he mispronounces his destination and stumbles out into this room full
of Dark Wizards who are performing a forbidden ritual that should’ve
stayed forever lost to time, and they’re sacriﬁcing seven victims in order
to unseal this ancient horror which is supposed to grant someone a wish
*

1216 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, FINALE:
RESPONSIBILIT Y

*
*

*

if it’s freed, so of course the boy’s presence interrupts the ritual, and
as the horror is eating all the Dark Wizards and everyone is dying the
boy’s last thought is that he wishes he could’ve had a girlfriend, and
the next thing you know the boy is lying in the lap of this beautiful
woman whose eyes are burning with a dreadful light, only she doesn’t
understand anything about being human so the boy always has to stop
her eating people. This is just like that play, only you’re the boy and
Harry Potter is the girl!”
“That...” Hermione said, feeling quite surprised. “That actually does
sound something like—”
“It does?” blurted a second-year girl sitting across the table, who was
now leaning forward, looking horriﬁed and yet even more fascinated.
“No!” said Hermione. “I mean—he’s not my boyfriend!”
Two seconds later, Hermione’s ears caught up with what her lips had
just said.
The fourth-year witch put her hand on Hermione’s shoulder and
gave her a comforting squeeze. “Miss Granger,” she said in a soothing
voice, “I think if you’re really honest with yourself, you’ll admit that the
real reason you’re angry with your dark master is that he channeled his
unspeakable powers through Tracey Davis instead of you.”
Hermione’s mouth opened but her throat locked up before the words
came out, which was probably a good thing, because if she’d actually
yelled that loudly it would’ve broken something.
“How’s that possible, actually?” said the third-year girl. “I mean for
Harry Potter to work through another girl even though he’s bound himself to you? Do the three of you have one of those, you know, arrangements?”
“Gaaaaack,” said Hermione Granger, her throat still locked, her
brain halted, and her vocal cords spontaneously making a noise like she
was coughing up a yak.

**
*
(Later.)
*

1217 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

“I don’t understand why you’re being so unreasonable,” said another
second-year witch, who’d replaced the third-year-girl after Hermione
had threatened to ask Tracey to eat her soul. “I mean, really, if someone
like Harry Potter rescued me, I’d be—sending him thank-you cards, and
hugging him, and,” the girl’s face was a bit red, “well, kissing him, I’d
hope.”
“Yeah!” said the other second-year witch. “I’ve never understood
why girls in plays get angry when the main character goes out of his way
to be nice to them. I wouldn’t act like that if the hero liked me.”
Hermione Granger had dropped her head to the dinner table, her
hands slowly pulling at her hair.
“You just don’t understand male psychology,” the fourth-year witch
said in an authoritative voice. “Granger’s got to make it look like she can
mysteriously resist his seductive charm.”

**
*
(Even later.)
And so before long Hermione Granger had turned to the only person
left she could talk to, the only person guaranteed to understand her point
of view—
“They’re all mad,” said Hermione Granger as she strode vigorously
toward Ravenclaw tower, having left dinner a bit early. “Everyone except
you and me, Harry, I mean everyone except us in this whole school of
Hogwarts, they’re all entirely mad. And Ravenclaw girls are the worst,
I don’t know what Ravenclaw girls go reading when they get older, but
I’m certain they ought not to be reading it. One witch asked me if the
two of us had soul-bonded, which I’m going to look up in the library
tonight, but I’m pretty sure has never actually happened—”
“I don’t even know a name for this kind of fallacious reasoning,” said
Harry Potter. The boy was walking normally, which meant he often
had to skip forward a few steps to match her own indignation-fueled
speed. “I seriously think if it was up to them, they’d be dragging us oﬀ
*

1218 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, FINALE:
RESPONSIBILIT Y

*
*

*

this minute to get our names changed to Potter-Evans-Verres-Granger...
Ugh, saying that out loud makes me realize how awful it sounds.”
“You mean your name would be Potter-Evans-Verres-Granger and
mine would be Granger-Potter-Evans-Verres,” said Hermione. “It’s too
horrible to imagine.”
“No,” said the boy, “House Potter is a Noble House, so I think that
name stays in front—”
“What?” she said indignantly. “Who says we have to—”
There was a sudden awful silence, broken only by the thuds of their
shoes.
“Anyhow,” Hermione said hastily, “some of the crazy things they
said at dinner got me thinking, so I just want to say, Harry, that I really
am grateful to you for saving me and everybody from getting beat up,
and even though some parts of this afternoon upset me, I’m sure we can
just talk about it calmly.”
“Ah...” Harry said with a faint and tentative smile, his eyes showing
a mixture of befuddlement and apprehension, “that’s... good, I guess?”
To be speciﬁc, there’d been the fourth-year witch explaining that,
since Harry was the evil wizard who’d fallen in love with Hermione,
and Hermione was the pure and innocent girl who would either redeem
him or get seduced by the Dark Arts herself, it followed that Hermione had to be perpetually indignant at anything Harry did, even if it
was him heroically saving her from certain doom, just so that their romance wouldn’t resolve itself before the end of Act IV. And then Penelope Clearwater, who Hermione had really thought was smarter than
that, had remarked in a loud voice that for identical reasons it was impossible for Hermione to just go over and talk sensibly with Harry about
why she was feeling hurt, and anyway Dark Wizards were attracted to
passionate deﬁance in a woman, not logic. This was the point at which
Hermione had shoved herself up from the benches, stomped furiously
over to where Harry was sitting, and asked him in a reasonable voice if
the two of them could go for a walk and sort things out.
“So in other words,” Hermione said in her calmest voice ever, “you’re
not really in trouble with me, I’m still talking to you, we’re still friends,
and we’re still studying together. We’re not having a ﬁght. Right?”
*

1219 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

Somehow this only seemed to increase Harry Potter’s apprehension.
“Right,” said the Boy-Who-Lived.
“Great!” said Hermione. “So, have you worked out why I was upset,
Mr. Potter?”
There was a pause. “You wanted me to keep out of your aﬀairs?”
Harry said cautiously. “I mean—I know you wanted to do things on
your own. And I was staying out of your way, until I’d heard you’d gotten ambushed by three junior Death Eaters and, honestly, I wasn’t expecting that. Professor Quirrell wasn’t expecting that. I started to worry
you’d gotten in over your head and then, no oﬀense Hermione, fortyfour bullies in a massed ambush is way beyond what anyone could handle without help. That’s why I thought you really needed help just that
once—”
“No, that part’s ﬁne,” said Hermione. “We were in over our heads,
honestly. Please guess again, Mr. Potter.”
“Um,” said Harry. “What Tracey did... startled you?”
“Startled me, Mr. Potter?” There might have been a touch of acidity in her voice. “No, Mr. Potter, I was scared. I was frightened. I
wouldn’t want to admit to being afraid of just dragons or something,
people might think I was cowardly, but when you can hear distant voices
crying ‘Tekeli-li! Tekeli-li!’ and there’s pools of blood seeping out from
under all the doors, then it’s okay to be scared.”
“I am sorry,” Harry said with what sounded like genuine regret. “I
thought you’d realize it was me.”
“And the reason we all got scared like that, Mr. Potter, was that you
didn’t ask ﬁrst!” Despite her intentions, Hermione found her voice was
rising again. “You should’ve asked me before you did something like
that, Harry! You should’ve said very speciﬁcally, ‘Hermione, can I make
blood come out from under the doors?’ It’s important to be speciﬁc
when you’re asking about that sort of thing!”
The boy rubbed the back of his neck as he walked. “I... honestly, I
just thought you’d have to say no.”
“Yes, Mr. Potter, I could’ve said no. That’s the whole point of asking
ﬁrst, Mr. Potter!”
“No, I mean you’d have had to say no, whether or not it was what
* 1220 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, FINALE:
RESPONSIBILIT Y

*
*

*

you really wanted. And then all of you would’ve gotten beaten up and
it would’ve been my fault for asking ﬁrst.”
Hermione’s eyebrows went up in a bit of surprise, and she kept walking for a few steps while she tried to understand this. “What?” she said.
“Well...” the boy said a bit slowly. “I mean... you’re the Sunshine
General, aren’t you? You couldn’t say yes to me scaring people, not
even bullies, not even to save your friends from getting beaten up. You
would’ve had to say no, and then you would’ve gotten hurt. This way,
you can tell people honestly that you had no idea and that it wasn’t your
fault. That’s why I didn’t warn you.”
Hermione stopped walking, turned to face Harry full on instead
of just turning her head. Her voice was carefully even as she said,
“Harry, you’ve got to stop coming up with clever reasons for doing
stupid things.”
Harry’s eyebrows ﬂew up. After a moment he said, “Look... I know
what you mean, of course, but there’s still the question of whether it’s
actually is a good idea, not just a clever one—”
“I understand why you did what you did today,” Hermione said.
“But I want you to promise that from now on, you’ll ask me ﬁrst, always,
even if you can come up with a reason why you shouldn’t.”
There was a pause that stretched, and Hermione could feel her heart
sinking.
“Hermione—” Harry started to say.
“Why?” The frustration burst out into her voice. “Why is it so awful?
All you have to do is ask!”
Harry’s eyes were very serious. “Who in sphew do you try hardest
to defend, Hermione? Who are you most afraid for, when you ﬁght?”
“Hannah Abbott,” Hermione said without having to think about it,
and then felt a little bad, because Hannah was trying hard and she had
improved a lot—
“Would you feel okay about trusting someone else, like Tracey, with
ﬁnal responsibility for protecting Hannah? If you knew Hannah was
about to walk into an ambush, and you came up with a plan for protecting her, would you feel good about letting Tracey say whether or not
you were allowed to do it?”
*

1221 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

“Well... no?” said Hermione, puzzled.
The green eyes of the Boy-Who-Lived were steady on hers. “Would
you trust Hannah to have the ﬁnal say in whether she needed protecting?”
“I—” said Hermione, and then paused. It was strange, she knew the
right answer and she also knew the right answer wasn’t actually true.
Hannah was trying so hard to prove she wasn’t afraid, even though she
was, and it was easy to see how the Huﬄepuﬀ girl might try too hard—
Then Hermione realized the implication. “You think I’m like Hannah?”
“Not... exactly...” Harry ran his hands through his mess of hair. “Listen, Hermione, what would you have suggested doing, if I’d warned you
about an ambush by forty-four bullies?”
“I would’ve done the responsible thing and told Professor McGonagall
and let her take care of it,” Hermione said promptly. “And then there
wouldn’t have been darkness and people screaming and horrible blue
light—”
But Harry just shook his head. “That’s not the responsible thing
to do, Hermione. It’s what someone playing the role of a responsible
girl would do. Yes, I thought of going to Professor McGonagall. But
she would’ve only stopped the disaster once. Probably before any disturbance happened in the ﬁrst place, like by telling the bullies she knew. If
the bullies got punished just for plotting, it would be by losing House
points, or at worst a day’s detention, not anything that would really
scare them. And then the bullies would have tried again. Fewer of them,
with better operational security so I didn’t hear about it. They would
probably ambush one of you, alone. Professor McGonagall doesn’t have
the authority to do something scary enough to protect you—and she
wouldn’t have overstepped her authority, because she’s not really responsible.”
“Professor McGonagall isn’t responsible?” Hermione said incredulously. She jammed her hands on her hips, now openly glaring at
him. “Are you nuts?”
The boy didn’t blink. “You could call it heroic responsibility,
maybe,” Harry Potter said. “Not like the usual sort. It means that what* 1222 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, FINALE:
RESPONSIBILIT Y

*
*

*

ever happens, no matter what, it’s always your fault. Even if you tell
Professor McGonagall, she’s not responsible for what happens, you are.
Following the school rules isn’t an excuse, someone else being in charge
isn’t an excuse, even trying your best isn’t an excuse. There just aren’t
any excuses, you’ve got to get the job done no matter what.” Harry’s face
tightened. “That’s why I say you’re not thinking responsibly, Hermione. Thinking that your job is done when you tell Professor McGonagall—that isn’t heroine thinking. Like Hannah being beat up is okay
then, because it isn’t your fault anymore. Being a heroine means your
job isn’t ﬁnished until you’ve done whatever it takes to protect the other
girls, permanently.” In Harry’s voice was a touch of the steel he had acquired since the day Fawkes had been on his shoulder. “You can’t think
as if just following the rules means you’ve done your duty.”
“I think,” Hermione said evenly, “that you and I might disagree about
some things, Mr. Potter. Like whether you or Professor McGonagall is
more responsible, and whether being responsible usually involves people
running around and screaming, and how much it’s a good idea to follow
school rules. And just because we disagree, Mr. Potter, doesn’t mean that
you get the ﬁnal say.”
“Well,” said Harry, “you asked what was so awful about having to
ask you ﬁrst, and it was a surprisingly good question, so I examined my
mind and that’s what I found. I think my real fear is that if Hannah is in
trouble and I come up with a way to save her that seems weird or dark
or something, you might not weigh the consequences to Hannah. You
might not accept the heroine’s responsibility of coming up with some
way to save her, somehow, no matter what. Instead you’d just carry out
the role of Hermione Granger, the sensible Ravenclaw girl; and the role
of Hermione Granger automatically says no, whether or not she has a
better plan in mind. And then forty-four bullies will take turns beating
up Hannah Abbott, and it’ll all be my fault because I knew, even if I
didn’t want reality to be that way, I knew that was how it would go. I’m
pretty sure that was my secret, wordless, unutterable fear.”
The frustration was building up inside her again. “It’s my life!” Hermione burst out. She could imagine what it would be like with Harry
messing with her all the time, constantly inventing justiﬁcations not to
* 1223 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

ask her ﬁrst and not to listen to her objections. She shouldn’t have to
win an argument just to—“There’ll always be some reason, you can always say I’m not thinking right! I want my own life! Otherwise I’ll walk
away, I really will, I mean it Harry.”
Harry sighed. “This is exactly where I didn’t want things to end up,
and here we are. You’re afraid of just the same thing I am, aren’t you?
Afraid that if you let go of the steering wheel, we’ll crash.” The corners
of his lips twisted, but it didn’t look like a real smile. “That’s something
I can understand.”
“I don’t think you understand at all!” Hermione said sharply. “You
said we’d be partners, Harry!”
That stopped him, she could see it stop him.
“How about this?” Harry said at last. “I’ll promise to ask you ﬁrst
before I do anything that could be interpreted as meddling in your aﬀairs.
Only you’ve got to promise me to be reasonable, Hermione. I mean
really, genuinely, stop and think for twenty seconds ﬁrst, treat it as a real
choice. The sort of reasonableness where you realize I’m oﬀering a way
to protect the other girls, and that if you automatically say no without
considering it properly, there’s this actual consequence where Hannah
Abbott ends up in the hospital.”
Hermione stared at Harry, as his recitation wound down.
“Well?” said Harry.
“I shouldn’t have to make promises,” she said, “just to be consulted
about my own life.” She turned from Harry and began walking toward
the Ravenclaw tower, not looking at him. “But I’ll think about it, anyway.”
She heard Harry sigh, and after that they walked in silence for a
while, passing through an archway of some reddish metal like copper,
into a corridor that was just like the one they’d left except that it was
tiled in pentagons instead of squares.
“Hermione...” said Harry. “I’ve been watching you and thinking,
since the day you said you were going to be a hero. You’ve got the
courage. You’ll ﬁght for what’s right, even in the face of enemies that
would scare other people away. You’ve certainly got the raw intelligence
for it, and you’re probably a better person inside than I am. But even
* 1224 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, FINALE:
RESPONSIBILIT Y

*
*

*

so... well, to be honest, Hermione... I can’t quite see you ﬁlling Dumbledore’s shoes, leading magical Britain’s ﬁght against You-Know-Who.
Not yet, anyway.”
Hermione had turned her head to stare at Harry, who just went on
walking, as though lost in thought. Fill those shoes? She’d never tried
to imagine herself that way. She’d never imagined imagining herself that
way.
“And maybe I’m wrong,” Harry said as they walked. “Maybe I’ve
just read too many stories where the heroes never do the sensible thing
and follow the rules and tell their Professor McGonagalls, so my brain
doesn’t think you’re a proper storybook hero. Maybe it’s you who’s the
sane one, Hermione, and me who’s just being silly. But every time you
talk about following rules or relying on teachers, I get that same feeling,
like it’s bound up with this one last thing that’s stopping you, one last
thing that puts your PC self to sleep and turns you into an NPC again...”
Harry let out a sigh. “Maybe that’s why Dumbledore said I should have
wicked stepparents.”
“He said what?”
Harry nodded. “I still don’t know whether the Headmaster was joking or... the thing is, he was right in a way. I had loving parents, but I
never felt like I could trust their decisions, they weren’t sane enough. I always knew that if I didn’t think things through myself, I might get hurt.
Professor McGonagall will do whatever it takes to get the job done if
I’m there to nag her about it, she doesn’t break rules on her own without heroic supervision. Professor Quirrell really is someone who gets
things done no matter what, and he’s the only other person I know who
notices stuﬀ like the Snitch ruining Quidditch. But him I can’t trust to
be good. Even if it’s sad, I think that’s part of the environment that creates what Dumbledore calls a hero—people who don’t have anyone else
to shove ﬁnal responsibility onto, and that’s why they form the mental
habit of tracking everything themselves.”
Hermione didn’t say anything to that, but she was thinking back
to something Godric Gryﬃndor had written near the end of his very
short autobiography. Brieﬂy and without any explanation, because the
scroll had been meant to be copied by hand, centuries before the Muggle
* 1225 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

printing press had inspired wizards to invent the Reading-Writing Quill.
No rescuer hath the rescuer, Godric Gryﬃndor had written. No Lord
hath the champion, no mother and no father, only nothingness above.
If that was the price of being a hero, Hermione wasn’t sure she
wanted to pay it. Or maybe—though it wasn’t the sort of thing she
would have thought, before she started hanging around Harry—maybe
Godric Gryﬃndor had gotten it wrong.
“Do you trust Dumbledore?” Hermione said. “I mean, he’s right here
in our school and he’s the most legendary hero in the whole world—”
“He was the most legendary hero,” said Harry. “Now he sets chickens on ﬁre. Honestly, does Dumbledore seem reliable to you?”
Hermione didn’t answer.
Side by side, the two of them began to climb huge wide spiral stairs,
the steps alternating between bronze metal and blue stone; the ﬁnal approach to where the Ravenclaw portrait waited to guard their dorm with
silly riddles.
“Oh, and I just thought of something I should tell you,” Harry said
when they were about halfway up. “Since it aﬀects your life and all.
Think of it as a sort of down payment—”
“What is it?” said Hermione.
“I predict sphew is about to retire.”
“Retire?” Hermione said, almost stumbling on one of the stairs.
“Yeah,” Harry said. “I mean, I could be wrong, but I suspect the
teachers are about to clamp down hard on ﬁghting in the corridors.”
Harry was grinning as he spoke, a glint in his eyes behind the glasses
hinting at secret knowledge. “Cast new wards to detect oﬀensive hexes,
or start verifying reports of bullying using Veritaserum—I can think of
several ways they might shut it down. But if I’m right, it’s something to
celebrate, Hermione, you and all of you. You kicked up enough public
ruckus that you got them to actually do something about the bullying.
All the bullying.”
Slowly, then, a smile began to creep up her lips, and as she reached the
top of the stairs and began walking toward the Ravenclaw portrait for
her riddle, Hermione felt rather lighter on her feet, a wonderful lifting
feeling spreading through her like she’d been pumped full of helium.
* 1226 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, FINALE:
RESPONSIBILIT Y

*
*

*

Somehow, despite all the eﬀort the eight of them had put in, she
hadn’t expected that much, she hadn’t expected it to actually work.
They’d made a diﬀerence...

**
*
It was the end of breakfast-time on the next morning.
The students from every year sat very still in their benches, all heads
turned in the same direction, toward the Head Table, before which one
lone ﬁrst-year girl stood rigid and motionless, her head tilted back to
stare up at the Head of House Slytherin.
Professor Snape’s face was twisted with fury and triumph, vindictive
as any painting of a Dark Wizard; and behind him the other Professors
sat at the Head Table, watching with faces as though carved from stone.
“—permanently disbanded,” spat the Potions Master. “Your selfproclaimed Society is outlawed within Hogwarts, by my decision as a
Professor! If your Society or any member of it is discovered ﬁghting
in the hallways again, Granger, you will be personally held responsible
and expelled, by me, from the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry!”
That ﬁrst-year girl stood there, before the Head Table where she’d
been called before only to receive commendations and smiles; stood
there with her spine held tall and upright in its curve like a centaur’s
bow, giving nothing to the enemy.
That ﬁrst-year witch stood there with all tears and anger bottled, her
face still, nothing changing of her outward appearance, while something
slowly broke inside her, she could feel it breaking.
It broke further when Professor Snape gave her two weeks detention
for the crime of violence in school, sneering with the contemptuous face
he’d shown them all on the ﬁrst day of Potions, and with a little twist in
the corner of his smile that said the Potions Master knew exactly how
unfair he was being.
* 1227 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FI V E

*
*

*

Whatever-it-was inside her cracked all the way through, from top to
bottom, when Professor Snape took one hundred points from Ravenclaw.
It ended, then, and Snape told her she was dismissed.
She turned around and saw that at the Ravenclaw table, Harry Potter
was sitting still in his place, she couldn’t see his expression from here,
she saw his ﬁsts on the table but she couldn’t see if they were clenched
white like her own. She had whispered to him, when Professor Snape
had called her, that he wasn’t to do anything without asking ﬁrst.
Hermione wheeled back again to look at the Head Table, just as
Snape was turning away from her to resume his place.
“I said you’re dismissed, girl,” said the sneering voice, but there was
a pleased smile on Snape’s face, like he was waiting for her to do something—
Hermione strode forward another ﬁve steps toward the Head Table
and said in a breaking voice, “Headmaster?”
Utter silence ﬁlled the Great Hall.
Headmaster Dumbledore said nothing, didn’t move. It was as though
he, too, was just carved from stone.
Hermione turned her gaze to look at Professor Flitwick, whose head,
barely visible above the table, seemed to be staring down into his lap. Beside him, Professor Sprout’s face was very tight, she seemed to be forcing
herself to watch, and her lips were trembling, but she said nothing.
Professor McGonagall’s chair was empty, the Deputy Headmistress
hadn’t shown up to breakfast that morning.
“Why aren’t any of you saying anything?” said Hermione Granger.
Her voice was trembling with the last of her hope, the last desperate
reach for help from that place inside her. “You know what he’s doing is
wrong!”
“Two more weeks’ detention, for insolence,” Snape said silkily.
It shattered.
She looked at the Head Table for a few seconds longer, at Professor Flitwick and Professor Sprout and the empty place where Professor
McGonagall should’ve been. Then Hermione Granger turned and began
walking toward the Ravenclaw table.
* 1228 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, FINALE:
RESPONSIBILIT Y

*
*

*

There was a babble of voices starting up, as the students came unfrozen from where they’d sat.
And then, as she was almost to the Ravenclaw table—
The dry voice of Professor Quirrell cut through everything, and
that voice said, “One hundred points to Miss Granger for doing what
is right.”
Hermione almost fell over her own feet; and then she continued forward, even as Snape shouted something furious, even as Professor Quirrell leaned back in his chair and began to laugh, even as Dumbledore’s
voice was saying something she didn’t catch and then she was sitting
down at the Ravenclaw table again next to Harry Potter.
Harry Potter was frozen beside her, he looked like someone who
didn’t dare move.
“It’s all right,” her voice said to him, automatically without there
being any choice or thought involved, although really it wasn’t right at
all. “But can you see if you can get me out of Snape’s detentions, like
you did yourself that time?”
Harry Potter nodded, a single jerky motion of his head. “I—” said
Harry. “I—I’m sorry, this—this is all my fault—”
“Don’t be ridiculous, Harry.” It was odd how her voice was coming
out all normal, and without her thinking about what to say. Hermione
looked down at her breakfast plate, but eating seemed to be clearly out
of the question, there was a roiling and churning in her stomach which
suggested that she was already on the verge of throwing up, which was
odd because she could have sworn her whole body felt numb, like she
wasn’t feeling anything, at the same time.
“And,” her voice said, “if you want to break school rules or something, you can ask me about it, I promise I won’t just say no.”

**
*
Non est salvatori salvator,
neque defensori dominus,
* 1229 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-FI V E
nec pater nec mater,
nihil supernum.
—Godric Gryﬃndor,
1202 c.e.

* 1230 *

*
*

*

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y-SIX

INTERLUDE WITH THE
CONFESSOR: SUNK COSTS
he descended the stairs of roughened stone and crude mortar, keeping
a Lumos lit through the distances between ﬁre-sconces, holding aloft
her wand through the gaps from light to light.
She came to the empty rock cavern pierced by many dark openings,
lit by a torch of ancient style that ﬁred as she entered.
There was no one else there, as yet, and after long minutes of nervous
standing, she began the spell to Transﬁgure a cushioned sofa large enough
for two people to sit, or maybe even lie down on. A simple wooden stool
would have been easier, she could have done that in ﬁfteen seconds, but—
well—
Even when the sofa was fully conjured, Professor Snape still hadn’t
arrived, and she sat down on the left side of her sofa with her pulse hammering in her throat. Somehow she was only becoming more nervous,
not less, as the delay stretched.
She knew this was the last time.
The last time before all these memories went away, and Rianne
Felthorne found herself in a mysterious cavern, wondering what was
going on.
There was something about it that felt like dying.
The books said a properly done Obliviation wasn’t harmful, people
forgot things all the time. People dreamed, and then woke up without
remembering their dreams. Obliviation didn’t even involve that much
discontinuity, it was like being distracted by a loud noise and losing track

S

*

1231 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

of a thought you couldn’t seem to remember afterward. That was what
the books said, and why Memory Charms were fully approved by the
Ministry for all authorized governmental purposes.
But still, these thoughts, the thoughts she was thinking right now;
soon nobody would have them anymore. When she looked ahead in the
future, there was nobody to complete the thoughts she wasn’t ﬁnished
thinking. Even if she managed to tie up all the loose ends in her mind
over the next minute, there wouldn’t be anything left of it afterward.
Wasn’t that exactly what you would ﬁnd yourself reﬂecting on, if you
were going to die in the next minute?
There came the sound of muﬄed steps...
Severus Snape emerged into the cavern.
His eyes moved to her sitting on the sofa, and a brief smile moved
his lips; and it was strange, because the smile wasn’t sardonic, or angry,
or cold.
“Thank you, Miss Felthorne,” Snape said quietly, “that was considerate of you.” The Potions Master took out his wand and performed the
usual privacy Charms, and then he moved toward her, and sat down
heavily beside her on the Transﬁgured sofa.
Her pulse was now pounding for another reason entirely.
She slowly turned to look at Professor Snape, and saw that his head
was leaning back against the sofa, and his eyes were closed. Not sleeping,
though. His face appeared tense, unrelaxed, bearing pain.
She knew—she was suddenly certain—that she was only allowed to
see this sight because she wouldn’t remember it afterward; and that nobody before her had ever been allowed to see it.
The frantic conversation going on inside Rianne Felthorne’s mind
sounded something like this: I could just lean over and kiss him, you are
completely out of your tiny mind, his eyes are closed I bet he wouldn’t stop
me in time, I bet it would be years before anyone found your body—
But Professor Snape opened his eyes then (to her inner disappointment and relief), and said, in a more normal voice, “Your payment, Miss
Felthorne.” From his robe he took a ruby, cut to Gringotts standard,
and held it out toward her. “Fifty facets. I will not mind if you count
them.”
* 1232 *

**
*

INTERLUDE WITH THE CONFESSOR:
SUNK COSTS

*
*

*

She held out a trembling hand, hoping that Snape would press the
ruby into her ﬁngers, that she would feel a touch of his skin alive against
hers—
But instead Snape raised his hand slightly and dropped the ruby into
her hand, then leaned back against the couch. “You will remember ﬁnding it lying on the ground of this cavern, where you came exploring,”
said Snape. “And since nobody except you will actually believe that,
you will remember thinking that it would be less troublesome if you
deposited the money into a separate box in Gringotts.”
For a stretch there was only the faint crackling of the torch.
“Why—” Rianne Felthorne said. He knows I won’t remember. “Why
did you do it? I mean—you said to tell you where bullies would be, and
who they would be, but not whether Granger would be there. And I
know, the way the Time-Turner works, if you want to make Granger be
there, you can’t be told whether it’s already happened. So I did work out
that we were the ones telling her where to go. We were, weren’t we?”
Snape nodded without speaking. He had closed his eyes again.
“But,” said Rianne, “I didn’t understand why you were helping her.
And now—after what you did to Granger in the Great Hall—I just don’t
understand at all.” Rianne had never thought of herself as particularly
nice. She’d taken little notice of the controversy over the Sunshine General. But something about helping Granger ﬁght bullies had... well, she’d
gotten used to thinking of that as the good side, and thinking of herself
as being on the good side. And she’d found she actually liked it. It was
hard, to just let that go. “Why’d you do that, Professor Snape?”
Snape shook his head, his face tightened.
“Is—” Rianne said falteringly. “I mean—so long as we’re here—is
there anything you do want to talk about?” There was something she
wanted to say, but she couldn’t make the words pass her own lips.
“I can think of one matter,” Snape said after a pause. “If you are
interested, Miss Felthorne.”
Snape’s eyes were still shut, so she couldn’t just nod her head. Her
voice almost broke, when she forced herself to say “Yes.”
“There’s a certain boy in your class who likes you, Miss Felthorne,”
Snape said from behind his closed eyes. “I won’t say his name. But he
* 1233 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

watches you every time you walk across the room, when he thinks you
aren’t looking. He dreams about you and desires to possess you, but he’s
never asked you for so much as a kiss.”
Her heart started hammering even harder.
“Please tell me the honest truth, Miss Felthorne. What do you think
of that boy?”
“Well—” she said. She was stumbling over her words. “I think—to
never even ask for one kiss—would be—”
Sad.
Just too pitiful.
“Weakness,” she said, her voice trembling.
“I agree,” said Snape. “Suppose that boy had helped you, though.
Would you think that you owed him a kiss, if he asked?”
She inhaled sharply—
“Or would you think,” Snape continued, his eyes still closed, “that
he was just being bothersome?”
The words stabbed into her like a knife and she couldn’t help gasping
out loud.
Snape’s eyes ﬂew open, and his gaze met hers across the sofa.
Then the Potions Master began to laugh, small sad chuckles.
“No, not you, Miss Felthorne!” Snape said. “Not you! We really are
talking about a boy. One who attends your Potions class, in fact.”
“Oh,” she said. She tried to remember what Snape had said before,
now feeling rather unnerved as she thought of some boy watching her,
always silently watching. “Well, um, in that case. That’s kind of creepy,
actually. Who is it?”
The Potions Master shook his head. “It doesn’t matter,” said Snape.
“Out of curiosity, what would you think if that boy were still in love
with you years later?”
“Um,” she said, feeling a bit confused, “that would be totally pathetic?”
The torch crackled a bit in the cavern.
“It’s strange,” Snape said quietly. “I have had two mentors, over the
course of my days. Both were extraordinarily perceptive, and neither
one ever told me the things I wasn’t seeing. It’s clear enough why the
* 1234 *

**
*

INTERLUDE WITH THE CONFESSOR:
SUNK COSTS

*
*

*

ﬁrst said nothing, but the second...” Snape’s face tightened. “I suppose I
would have to be naive, to ask why he stayed silent.”
The quiet stretched, while Rianne tried frantically to think of something to say.
“It is an odd thing,” Snape said, his voice still softer, “to look back
after only thirty-two years, and wonder when your life was ruined past
all rescuing. Was it determined when the Sorting Hat cried ‘Slytherin!’
for me? It seems unfair, since I was oﬀered no choice; the Sorting Hat
spoke the moment it touched upon my head. Yet I cannot claim it named
me untruly. I never treasured knowledge for its own sake. I was not loyal
to the one person I called friend. I was never one for righteous fury, then
or now. Courage? There is no bravery in risking a life already ruined.
My little fears have always mastered me, and I never turned aside from
any of the paths I walked down, for those little fears. No, the Sorting
Hat could never have put me in her House. Perhaps my ﬁnal loss was
determined, even then. Is that fair, I ask, even if the Sorting Hat speaks
truly? Is it fair that some children should possess more courage than
others, and thus a man’s life be judged?”
Rianne Felthorne was starting to realize that she’d never had the tiniest inkling of who her Potions Master was inside, and unfortunately all
these dark hidden depths weren’t helping her with her problem.
“But no,” Snape said. “I know where it went wrong for the last time.
I could point to the very day and hour I missed my ﬁnal chance. Miss
Felthorne, did the Sorting Hat oﬀer you Ravenclaw?”
“Y-yes,” she said without thinking.
“Have you ever been any good at riddles?”
“Yes,” she said again, because whatever Professor Snape was about to
say, she wouldn’t hear it if she said no.
“I am terrible at riddles,” Snape said in a distant voice. “I was once
given a riddle to solve, and I did not understand even the simplest part
until too late. I did not even realize the riddle was meant for me until
too late. I thought I had merely happened to overhear it, when in truth
it was I who was overheard. So I sold my riddle to another, and that is
when the wreckage of my life passed beyond retrieval.” Snape’s voice was
still distant, sounding more abstracted than sorrowful. “And even now,
* 1235 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

I understand nothing of importance. Tell me, Miss Felthorne, suppose
I were carrying a knife, and I tripped over a baby and stabbed myself.
Would you say that the baby had,” Snape’s voice lowered, as though he
were imitating some still deeper voice, “The power to vanquish me?”
“Um... no?” she said hesitantly.
“Then what does it mean to have the power to vanquish someone?”
Rianne considered the puzzle. (Wishing, not for the ﬁrst time in
her life, that she had chosen Ravenclaw and to perdition with her parents’ disapproval; but the Sorting Hat had never oﬀered her Gryﬃndor.)
“Well...” Rianne said. She was having trouble putting her thoughts into
words. “It means you’ve got the power, but you don’t have to do it. It
means you could do it if you tried—”
“Choice,” the Potions Master said in the same faraway voice, as
though he wasn’t really talking to her at all. “There will be a choice.
That is what the riddle seems to imply. And that choice is not a foregone conclusion to the chooser, for the riddle does not say, will vanquish,
but rather the power to vanquish. How would a grown man mark a baby
as his equal?”
“What?” said Rianne. She didn’t understand that at all.
“Marking a baby is simple. Any strong Dark curse would produce
a lasting scar. But such may be done to any child. What mark would
signify that a baby was your equal?”
She answered with the ﬁrst thought that came to mind. “If you signed
a betrothal contract, that would mean you’d be equals with them someday, when they grew up and you got married.”
“That...” said Snape. “That’s probably not it, Miss Felthorne, but
thank you for trying.” The long delicate ﬁngers, honed by stirring potions to unimaginably ﬁne tolerances, reached up and rubbed at the temples of the man’s forehead. “It is enough to drive me to madness, so much
hinging on such fragile words. Power he knows not... it must be more
than some unknown spell. Not something he could acquire simply by
practice and study. Some innate talent? No one can learn to be a Metamorphmagus... and yet that hardly seems like a power he knows not. Nor
can I see how either could destroy all but a remnant of the other; I can
see it in one direction, but not the reverse...” The Potions Master sighed.
* 1236 *

**
*

INTERLUDE WITH THE CONFESSOR:
SUNK COSTS

*
*

*

“And none of this means anything to you, does it, Miss Felthorne? The
words are nothing. The words are shadows. It is her intonation which
carries the meaning and that is something I’ve never been able to...”
The Potions Master trailed oﬀ, while Rianne stared at him.
“A prophecy?” Rianne said in a high squeak. “You heard a prophecy?”
She’d taken Divination for a couple of months before dropping it in
disgust, and she knew that much about how it worked.
“I will try one last thing,” said Snape. “Something I have not tried
before. Miss Felthorne, listen to the sound of my voice, the way I say
it, not the words themselves, and tell me what you think it means. Can
you do that? Good,” said Snape, as she nodded obediently, though she
wasn’t sure at all what she was supposed to do.
And Severus Snape drew a breath, and intoned, “For those two different spellets cannot exist in the same vuld.”
It sent shivers down her spine, all the worse for knowing the hollow
words had been spoken in imitation of a true prophecy. Unnerved, she
blurted out the ﬁrst thing which came to mind, which might have been
inﬂuenced by her present company. “Those two diﬀerent ingredients
cannot exist in the same cauldron?”
“But why not, Miss Felthorne? What is the meaning of a statement
like that? What are we really being told?”
“Ah...” she hazarded. “If the two ingredients mix, they’ll catch ﬁre
and burn the cauldron?”
Snape’s face did not change expression in the slightest.
“Perhaps,” Snape ﬁnally said, after they’d sat on the sofa in awful
silence for what seemed like minutes. “It would explain the word must.
Thank you, Miss Felthorne. Once again you have been most helpful.”
“I—” she said, “I was glad to—” and the words stuck in her throat.
The Potions Master had thanked her with a tone of ﬁnality, and she knew
that the time of the Rianne Felthorne who remembered these moments
was drawing to an end. “I wish I didn’t have to forget this, Professor
Snape!”
“I wish,” Severus Snape said in a whisper so low she could hardly
hear it, “that everything had been diﬀerent...”
The Potions Master stood up from the sofa, the weight of his presence
* 1237 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SIX

*
*

*

vanishing from beside her. He turned and drew his wand from his robes,
pointing it at her.
“Wait—” she said. “Before that—”
Somehow it was unbelievably hard to take the ﬁrst step from fantasy
to reality, from imagining to doing. Even if it was only one step and
would never go any further. The gap stretched like the distance between
two mountains.
The Sorting Hat had never oﬀered her Gryﬃndor...
...was it fair that thus a woman’s life be judged?
If you can’t say it now, when you won’t even remember it afterward—
when nothing will continue from this moment, just as if you were to die—
then when will you ever say it, to anyone?
“Can I have a kiss ﬁrst?” said Rianne Felthorne.
Snape’s black eyes studied her so intensely that her blush started to
reach all the way to her chest, and she wondered if he knew perfectly well
that she was still being weak, and it wasn’t a kiss she’d truly wanted.
“Why not,” the Potions Master said quietly, and he leaned his head
down over the sofa and kissed her.
It was nothing like she’d imagined. In her fantasies Snape’s kisses
were ﬁerce, seized from her, but this was—it was just awkward, actually.
Snape’s lips pressed down too hard on hers, forcing them back against
her teeth, and the angle wasn’t right and their noses were sort of bending
and his lips were too tight and—
Only as the Potions Master straightened back up again, raising his
wand once more, did she realize.
“That wasn’t—” she said in a wondering voice, looking up at him.
“That wasn’t—was it—your ﬁrst—”
Rianne Felthorne blinked at the stone cavern she’d discovered, still
holding the extraordinary ruby she’d found embedded in the dirt of one
corner. It was an incredible windfall, and she didn’t know why looking
at the ruby made her feel so sad, like she’d forgotten something, something that had been precious to her.

* 1238 *

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

SELF-ACTUALIZATION,
AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES
Aftermath: Albus Dumbledore and —
he old wizard sat alone at his desk, in the unsilence of the Headmaster’s oﬃce, amid the innumerable and unnoticed devices; his
robes a gentle yellow, of soft fabric, not such clothing as he ordinarily
wore before others. His wrinkled hand held a quill scratching away at
an oﬃcial-looking parchment. If you had somehow been there to watch
his lined face, you would have been unable to deduce anything more
about the man himself than you understood of the enigmatic devices.
You might have observed that the face looked a little sad, a little tired,
but then Albus Dumbledore always looked like that when he was alone.
In the Floo hearth there were only scattered ashes without a hint of
ﬂame, a magical door that had been shut so solidly as to stop existing.
On the material plane, the great oaken door to the oﬃce had been closed
and locked; beyond that door, the Endless Stairs stayed motionless; at the
bottom of those stairs, the gargoyles that blocked the entrance did not
ﬂow, their pseudo-life withdrawn to leave solid rock.
Then, even as the quill was in the middle of penning a word, even as
it was in the middle of scratching a letter—
The old wizard shot to his feet with a speed that would have shocked
anyone watching, abandoning the quill in mid-letter to fall onto the

T

* 1239 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

parchment; like lightning he spun on the oaken door, his yellow robes
whirling around him and a wand of dread power leaping into his hand—
And as abruptly, the old wizard paused, halting his motion even as
the wand came to bear.
A hand struck upon the oaken door, three times knocking.
More slowly, now, that grim wand went back into the dueling holster
strapped beneath the old wizard’s sleeve. The ancient man moved forward a few paces, drew himself up into a more formal stance, composed
his face. Nearby upon the desk, the quill moved to the side of the parchment, as though it had been carefully placed there rather than dropped
in haste; and the parchment itself ﬂipped over to show blankness.
With a silent twitch of his will, the oaken door swung open.
Hard as stones, the green eyes glared at him.
“I admit that I am impressed, Harry,” the old wizard said quietly.
“The Cloak of Invisibility would have let you evade my lesser means of
vision; but I did not sense my golems step aside, nor the stairs turning.
How did you come here?”
The boy walked into the oﬃce, step by deliberate step until the door
closed smoothly behind him. “I can go anywhere I choose, with or without permission,” that boy said. His voice seemed calm; too calm, perhaps. “I am in your oﬃce because I decided to be here, and to hell with
passwords. You are greatly mistaken, Headmaster Dumbledore, if you
think that I stay in this school because I am a prisoner here. I simply
have not chosen, yet, to leave. Now keeping that in mind, why did you
tell your agent, Professor Snape, to break the agreement we made in this
oﬃce, that he would not torment any student in her fourth year or below?”
The old wizard looked at the angry young hero for a long moment.
Then, slowly enough not to alarm the boy, those wizened ﬁngers drew
open one of the manifold drawers of the desk, lifted out a sheet of parchment, laid it upon the desk. “Fourteen,” the old wizard said. “It is not
the number of all the owls sent last night. Only the owls sent to families
with a seat on the Wizengamot, or families of great wealth, or families
already allied with your foes. Or, in the case of Robert Jugson, all three;
for his father, Lord Jugson, is a Death Eater, and his grandfather a Death
* 1240 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

Eater who died by Alastor Moody’s wand. What the letters said, I do
not know, but I can guess. Do you still not understand, Harry Potter?
Each time Hermione Granger won, as you put it, the danger to her from
Slytherin grew again, and yet again. But now the Slytherins have triumphed over her, easily and safely, without violence or lasting harm.
They have won, and need ﬁght no more...” The old wizard sighed. “So
I had planned. So I had hoped. So it would have been, if the Defense
Professor had not taken it upon himself to intervene. Now the dispute
goes to the Board of Governors, where Severus will seem to conquer the
Defense Professor; but that will not feel the same to the Slytherins, it
will not have been over and ﬁnished in a moment, to their satisfaction.”
The boy advanced further into the room, his head tilting back further
to look up at the half-moon glasses; and somehow it was like the boy was
looking down at the Headmaster, rather than up. “So this Lord Jugson
is a Death Eater?” the boy said softly. “Good. His life is already bought
and paid for, then, and I can do anything I want to him without ethical
problems—”
“Harry!”
The boy’s voice was clear as ice, frozen of purest water from some
untouched spring. “You seem to think that the Light should live in fear
of the darkness. I say it should be the other way around. I’d prefer not to
kill this Lord Jugson, even if he is a Death Eater. But one hour of brainstorming with the Defense Professor would be plenty of time to come
up with some creative way to wreck him ﬁnancially, or get him exiled
from magical Britain. That would serve to make the point, I think.”
“I confess,” the old wizard said slowly, “that the thought of ruining
a ﬁve-hundred-year-old House, and challenging a Death Eater to war to
the ﬁnish, over a scuﬄe in a Hogwarts hallway, had not occurred to
me, Harry.” The old wizard lifted a ﬁnger to push back his half-moon
glasses from where they had slid a little down his nose, during his sudden
motion earlier. “I daresay it would not occur to Miss Granger either, nor
to Professor McGonagall, nor to Fred and George.”
The boy shrugged. “It wouldn’t be about the hallways,” the boy said.
“It would be justice for his past crimes, and I’d only do it if Jugson made
the ﬁrst move. The point isn’t to make people scared of me as a wild
*

1241 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

card, after all. It’s to teach them that neutrals are perfectly safe from me,
and poking me with a stick is incredibly dangerous.” The boy smiled
in a way that didn’t reach his eyes. “Maybe I’ll buy an ad in the Daily
Prophet, saying that anyone who wants to carry on this dispute with me
will learn the true meaning of Chaos, but anyone who leaves me alone
will be ﬁne.”
“No,” the old wizard said. His voice was deeper now, showing something of his true age and power. “No, Harry, that must not be. You
have not yet learned the meaning of ﬁghting, what truly happens when
foes meet in battle. And so you dream, as young boys do, of teaching
your foes to fear you. It frightens me that you, at far too young an age,
might already have enough power to make some part of your dreams
into reality. There is no turning of that road which does not lead into
darkness, Harry, none. That is the way of a Dark Lord, for certain.”
The boy hesitated, then, and his eyes ﬂickered to the empty golden
platform where Fawkes sometimes rested his wings. It was a gesture that
few would have caught, but the old wizard knew it very well.
“All right, forget the part about teaching them to fear me,” the boy
said then. His voice was no less hard, but some of the cold had gone from
it. “I still don’t think you should let children get hurt out of fear of what
someone like Lord Jugson might do. Protecting them is the whole point
of your job. If Lord Jugson really does try to get in your way, then do
whatever it takes to stop him. Give me full access to my vaults, and I’ll
take personal responsibility for dealing with any fallout from banning
bullies in Hogwarts, whether it’s Lord Jugson or anyone else.”
Slowly the old wizard shook his head. “You seem to think, Harry,
that I need merely use my full power, and all foes will be swept aside.
You are wrong. Lucius Malfoy controls Minister Fudge, through the
Daily Prophet he sways all Britain, only by bare margins does he not
control enough of the Board of Governors to oust me from Hogwarts.
Amelia Bones and Bartemius Crouch are allies, but even they would step
aside if they saw us acting wantonly. The world that surrounds you is
more fragile than you seem to believe, and we must walk with greater
care. The old Wizarding War never ended, Harry, it only continued
in a diﬀerent form; the black king slept, and Lucius Malfoy moved his
* 1242 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

chesspieces for a time. Do you think Lucius Malfoy would lightly permit
you to take a pawn of his color?”
The boy smiled, now with a touch of coldness again. “Okay, I’ll
ﬁgure out some way to set it up so that it looks like Lord Jugson betrayed
his own side.”
“Harry—”
“Obstacles mean you get creative, Headmaster. It doesn’t mean you
abandon the children you’re supposed to protect. Let the Light win, and
if trouble comes of it—” The boy shrugged. “Let Light win again.”
“So might phoenixes speak, if they had words,” the old wizard said.
“But you do not understand the phoenix’s price.”
The last two words were spoken in a peculiarly clear voice that
seemed to echo around the oﬃce, and then a huge rumbling noise seemed
to come from all around them.
Between the ancient shield on the wall and the Sorting Hat’s hatrack,
the stone of the walls began to ﬂow and move, pouring itself into two
framing columns and revealing a gap between them, an opening that
showed a set of stone stairs leading upward into darkness.
The old wizard turned and strode toward those stairs, and then
looked back at where Harry Potter stood. “Come!” said the old wizard. There was no twinkle now in those blue eyes. “Since you have
already gone so far as to force your way here uninvited, you may as well
go further.”

**
*
There were no railings on those stone steps, and after the ﬁrst few steps
Harry drew his wand and cast Lumos. The Headmaster did not look
back, did not seem to be looking downward, as though he had climbed
the steps often enough to have no need of vision.
The boy knew that he should have been curious, or frightened, but
there was no spare brain capacity for that. It was taking all his control
not to let the fury simmering inside him boil over any further than it
already had.
* 1243 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

The stairs went on for only a short distance, one straight rising ﬂight
without turns or curves.
At the top was a door of solid metal, looking black in the blue light
cast from Harry’s wand, meaning that the metal itself was either black
or perhaps red.
Albus Dumbledore lifted up his long wand like a brandished symbol,
and again spoke in that strange voice which seemed to echo in Harry’s
ears, as though burning itself into his memory: “Phoenix’s fate.”
That last door opened, and Harry followed Dumbledore inside.
The room beyond seemed to be made of black metal like the door
that led to it. The walls were black, the ﬂoor was black. The ceiling
above was black, but for a single globe of crystal that hung down from
the ceiling on a white chain, and shone with a brilliant silver light that
looked like it had been cast in imitation of Patronus light, though you
could tell it wasn’t the real thing.
Within the room were pedestals of black metal, each bearing a moving picture, or an upright cylinder half-ﬁlled with some faintly shining
silver liquid, or a lone small object; a scorched silver necklace, a crushed
hat, an untouched golden wedding ring. Many pedestals bore all three,
the moving picture and the silver liquid and the item. There seemed to
be a good many wizards’ wands upon those pedestals, and many of those
wands were broken, or burned, or looked like the wood had somehow
melted.
It took that long for Harry to realize what he was seeing, and then
his throat suddenly choked; it was like the rage inside him had been hit
a hammerblow, maybe the hardest hammerblow of his entire existence.
“These are not all the fallen of all my wars,” Albus Dumbledore said.
His back was to Harry, only his grey locks and yellowish robes showed.
“Not even nearly all of them. Only my closest friends, and those who
died of my worst decisions, there is something of them here. Those I
regret most of all, this is their place.”
Harry couldn’t count how many pedestals were in the room. It
might have been around a hundred. The room of black metal was not
small, and there was clearly more space left in it for future pedestals.
Albus Dumbledore turned and regarded Harry, the deep blue eyes set
* 1244 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

like steel in his brow, but his voice, when he spoke, was calm. “It seems
to me that you know nothing of the phoenix’s price,” Albus Dumbledore said quietly. “It seems to me that you are not an evil person, but
most terribly ignorant, and conﬁdent in your ignorance; as I once was,
a long time ago. Yet I have never heard Fawkes so clearly as you seemed
to, that day. Perhaps I was already too old and full of grief, when my
phoenix came to me. If there is something I do not understand, about
how ready I should be to ﬁght, then tell me of this wisdom.” There was
no anger in the old wizard’s voice; the impact that drove out your breath
like falling oﬀ a broomstick was all in the scorched and shattered wands,
gleaming gently in their death beneath the silver light. “Or else turn and
go from this place, but then I wish to hear no more of it.”
Harry didn’t know what to say. There had been nothing in his own
life that was like this, and all the words seemed to fall away. He would
ﬁnd something to say if he looked, but he couldn’t believe, in that moment, that the words would be meaningful. You shouldn’t be able to
win any possible argument, just from people having died of your decisions, and yet even knowing that it felt like there was nothing to be said.
That there was nothing Harry had any right to say.
And Harry almost did turn and go from that place, except for the
understanding which came to him then: that there was probably a part of
Albus Dumbledore which always stood in this place, always, no matter
where he was. And that if you stood in a place like this you could do
anything, lose anything, if it meant that you didn’t have to ﬁght another
time.
One of the pedestals caught Harry’s eye; the photograph on it did
not move, did not smile or wave, it was a Muggle photograph of a woman
looking seriously at the camera, her brown hair twisted into braids of
an ordinary Muggle style that Harry hadn’t seen on any witch. There
was a cylinder of silvery liquid beside the photograph, but no object; no
melted ring or broken wand.
Harry walked forward, slowly, until he stood before the pedestal.
“Who was she?” Harry said, his voice sounding strange in his own ears.
“Her name was Tricia Glasswell,” said Dumbledore. “The mother of
a Muggleborn daughter, who the Death Eaters killed. She was a detec* 1245 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

tive of the Muggle government, and after that she fed information from
the Muggle authorities to the Order of the Phoenix, until she was—
betrayed—into the hands of Voldemort.” There was a catch in the old
wizard’s voice. “She did not die well, Harry.”
“Did she save lives?” Harry said.
“Yes,” the wizard said quietly. “She did.”
Harry lifted his gaze from the pedestal to look at Dumbledore.
“Would the world be a better place if she hadn’t fought?”
“No, it would not,” said the old wizard. His voice was tired, and
grieving. He seemed more bent now, as though he were folding in on
himself. “I see that you still do not understand. I think you will not
understand until the day that you—oh, Harry. So very long ago, when I
was not much older than you are now, I learned the true face of violence,
and its cost. To ﬁll the air with deadly curses—for any reason—for any
reason, Harry—it is an ill thing, and its nature is corrupted, as terrible
as the darkest rituals. Violence, once begun, becomes like a Lethifold
that strikes at any life near it. I... would spare you that lesson the way I
learned it, Harry.”
Harry looked away from the blue eyes, cast his gaze down at the
black metal of the ﬂoor. The Headmaster was trying to tell him something important, that was clear; and it wasn’t something that Harry
thought was stupid, either.
“There was a Muggle once named Mohandas Gandhi,” Harry said
to the ﬂoor. “He thought the government of Muggle Britain shouldn’t
rule over his country. And he refused to ﬁght. He convinced his whole
country not to ﬁght. Instead he told his people to walk up to the British
soldiers and let themselves be struck down, without resisting, and when
Britain couldn’t stand doing that any more, we freed his country. I
thought it was a very beautiful thing, when I read about it, I thought
it was something higher than all the wars that anyone had ever fought
with guns or swords. That they’d really done that, and that it had actually worked.” Harry drew another breath. “Only then I found out that
Gandhi told his people, during World War II, that if the Nazis invaded
they should use nonviolent resistance against them, too. But the Nazis
would’ve just shot everyone in sight. And maybe Winston Churchill
* 1246 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

always felt that there should’ve been a better way, some clever way to
win without having to hurt anyone; but he never found it, and so he
had to ﬁght.” Harry looked up at the Headmaster, who was staring at
him. “Winston Churchill was the one who tried to convince the British
government not to give Czechoslovakia to Hitler in exchange for a peace
treaty, that they should ﬁght right away—”
“I recognize the name, Harry,” said Dumbledore. The old wizard’s
lips twitched upward. “Although honesty compels me to say that dear
Winston was never one for pangs of conscience, even after a dozen shots
of Firewhiskey.”
“The point is,” Harry said, after a brief pause to remember exactly
who he was talking to, and ﬁght down the suddenly returning sense that
he was an ignorant child gone insane with audacity who had no right
to be in this room and no right to question Albus Dumbledore about
anything, “the point is, saying violence is evil isn’t an answer. It doesn’t
say when to ﬁght and when not to ﬁght. It’s a hard question and Gandhi
refused to deal with it, and that’s why I lost some of my respect for him.”
“And your own answer, Harry?” Dumbledore said quietly.
“One answer is that you shouldn’t ever use violence except to stop
violence,” Harry said. “You shouldn’t risk anyone’s life except to save
even more lives. It sounds good when you say it like that. Only the
problem is that if a police oﬃcer sees a burglar robbing a house, the
police oﬃcer should try to stop the burglar, even though the burglar
might ﬁght back and someone might get hurt or even killed. Even if the
burglar is only trying to steal jewelry, which is just a thing. Because if
nobody so much as inconveniences burglars, there will be more burglars,
and more burglars. And even if they only ever stole things each time,
it would—the fabric of society—” Harry stopped. His thoughts weren’t
as ordered as they usually pretended to be, in this room. He should
have been able to give some perfectly logical exposition in terms of game
theory, should have at least been able to see it that way, but it was eluding
him. Hawks and doves—“Don’t you see, if evil people are willing to
risk violence to get what they want, and good people always back down
because violence is too terrible to risk, it’s—it’s not a good society to
live in, Headmaster! Don’t you realize what all this bullying is doing to
* 1247 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

Hogwarts, to Slytherin House most of all?”
“War is too terrible to risk,” the old wizard said. “And yet it will
come. Voldemort is returning. The black chesspieces are gathering.
Severus is one of the most important pieces our own side possesses, in
that war. But our evil Potions Master must, as the saying goes, keep
up appearances. If Severus can pay that keep by hurting the feelings of
children, only their feelings, Harry,” the old wizard’s voice was very
soft, “you would have to be most terribly innocent in the ways of war,
to think he had made a poor bargain. Hard decisions do not look like
that, Harry. They look—like this.” The old wizard did not gesture. He
simply stood where he was, among the pedestals.
“You shouldn’t be Headmaster,” Harry said through the burning in
his throat. “I’m sorry, I’m so sorry, but you shouldn’t try to be a school
principal and run a war at the same time. Hogwarts shouldn’t be part
of this.”
“The children will survive,” the old wizard said with tired old eyes.
“They would not survive Voldemort. Have you wondered why the children of Hogwarts do not speak much of their parents, Harry? It is because there is always, within earshot, someone who has lost their mother
or father or both. That is what Voldemort left behind, the last time he
came. Nothing is worth that war beginning again even one day earlier
than it must, or lasting one day longer than it must.” The old wizard did
gesture now, as though to indicate all the shattered wands. “We did not
ﬁght because it seemed righteous to do so! We fought when we had to,
when there was no other way left. That was our answer.”
“Is that why you waited so long to confront Grindelwald?”
Harry had uttered the question without quite thinking—
There was a slow time while the blue eyes searched him.
“Who have you been talking to, Harry?” said the old wizard. “No,
do not answer. I already know.” Dumbledore sighed. “Many have asked
me that question, and always I have turned them aside. Yet in time you
must learn the full truth of that matter. Will you swear never to speak
of it to another, until I give you leave?”
Harry would have liked to be allowed to tell Draco, but—“I swear,”
Harry said.
* 1248 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

“I could not break Grindelwald’s defense,” said Dumbledore. “In
our duel I could not win, only ﬁght him for long hours until he fell in
exhaustion; and I would have died of it afterward, if not for Fawkes. But
while his Muggle allies yet made blood sacriﬁce to sustain him, Grindelwald would not have fallen. He was, during that time, truly invincible.
There is an ill thing bound up in this matter; a grim secret of which
none must know, none must suspect, there must be not a single hint.
And therefore you must not speak of it, and I will say no more for now.
That is all, Harry. There is no moral to it, and no wisdom. That is all
there is.”
Harry slowly nodded. It wasn’t entirely implausible, by the standards of magic...
“And then,” Dumbledore’s voice went on, even quieter, almost as
though he were speaking to himself, “since it was I who felled him, they
obeyed me when I said he should not die, though they cried by the thousands for his blood. So he was imprisoned in Nurmengard, in the prison
that he built, and he abides there until this day. I went to that duel
without any intent to kill him, Harry. Because, you see, I had tried to
kill Grindelwald once before, a long time ago, and that... that was... it
proved to be... a mistake, Harry...” The old wizard was staring now at
his long dark-grey wand where he held it in both hands, as though it
were a crystal ball out of Muggle fantasy, a scrying pool within which
answers could be found. “And I thought, then... I thought that I should
never kill. And then came Voldemort.”
The old wizard looked back up at Harry, and said, in a hoarse voice,
“He is not like Grindelwald, Harry. There is nothing human left in him.
Him you must destroy. You must not hesitate, when the time comes. To
him alone, of all the creatures in this world, you must show no mercy;
and when you are done you must forget it, forget that you ever did such
a thing, and go back to living. Save your fury for that, and that alone.”
In that oﬃce there was silence.
It lasted for some many long seconds, and ﬁnally was broken by a
single question.
“Are there Dementors in Nurmengard?”
“What?” said the old wizard. “No! I would not have done that even
* 1249 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

to him—”

**
*
The old wizard stared at the young boy, who had straightened, and his
face changed.
“In other words,” the boy said, as though talking to himself without
any other people in the room, “it’s already known how to keep powerful
Dark Wizards in prison, without using Dementors. People know they
know that.”
“Harry...?”
“No,” the boy said. The boy looked up, and his eyes were blazing
like green ﬁre. “I do not accept your answer, Headmaster. Fawkes gave
me a mission, and I know now why Fawkes gave that mission to me, and
not to you. You are willing to accept balances of power where the bad
guys end up winning. I am not.”
“That too is not an answer,” the old wizard said; his face showed
nothing of his hurt, he had long practice in concealing pain. “Refusing
to accept something does not change it. I wonder now if you are simply
too young to understand this matter, Harry, despite your outward airs;
only in children’s fantasies can all battles be won, and not a single evil
tolerated.”
“And that’s why I can destroy Dementors and you can’t,” said the
boy. “Because I believe that the darkness can be broken.”
The old wizard’s breath stopped in his throat.
“The phoenix’s price isn’t inevitable,” the boy said. “It’s not part of
some deep balance built into the universe. It’s just the parts of the game
where you haven’t ﬁgured out yet how to cheat.”
Silver light falling, on broken and shattered wands. The old wizard
opened his mouth, and no words came forth.
“Fawkes gave me a mission,” the boy repeated, “and I will carry out
that mission if I must break the entire Ministry to do it. That’s the part
of the answer that you’re missing. You don’t stop and say, oh well, guess
I can’t possibly ﬁgure out any way to stop bullying in Hogwarts, and leave it
* 1250 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

at that. You just keep looking until you ﬁgure out how to do it. If that
requires breaking Lucius Malfoy’s entire conspiracy, ﬁne.”
“And the true ﬁght, the ﬁght against Voldemort?” the old wizard said
in an unsteady voice. “What will you do to win that, Harry? Will you
break the whole world? Even if someday you gain such power, you are
not yet beyond prices, and perhaps you never will be! For you to act
this way now is nothing short of madness!”
“I asked Professor Quirrell why he’d laughed,” the boy said evenly,
“after he awarded Hermione those hundred points. And Professor Quirrell said, these aren’t his exact words, but it’s pretty much what he said,
that he’d found it tremendously amusing that the great and good Albus
Dumbledore had been sitting there doing nothing as this poor innocent
girl begged for help, while he had been the one to defend her. And he told
me then that by the time good and moral people were done tying themselves up in knots, what they usually did was nothing; or, if they did act,
you could hardly tell them apart from the people called bad. Whereas
he could help innocent girls any time he happened to feel like it, because
he wasn’t a good and moral person. And that I ought to remember that,
any time I considered growing up to be good.”
The old wizard did not show the force of the blow. Only a slight
widening of his eyes would have betrayed it, if you had been watching
him very closely.
“Don’t worry, Headmaster,” said the boy. “I haven’t gotten my wires
crossed. I know that I’m supposed to learn goodness from Hermione and
Fawkes, not from Professor Quirrell and you. Which brings me to the
actual reason why I came here. Hermione’s time is too valuable to waste
in detentions. Professor Snape will revoke it, claiming that I blackmailed
him.”
After a hesitation the old wizard nodded his head, the silver beard
swaying slowly beneath. “That would not be best for her, Harry,” the
old wizard said. “But the detention can be put down as being served with
Professor Binns, and you and she can study together in his classroom.”
“Fine,” the boy said. “I think that was all the business we had together, in the end. You may expect, the next time you seem to be working on the side of the bad guys or letting them win, that I will do what*

1251 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

ever I think Fawkes would tell me to, regardless of how much trouble
comes of it. I hope we’re both clear on that.”
Without another word, the boy turned and walked out of the room,
through the open door of black metal, the words “Lumos!” and the light
of his wand following a moment later.
The old wizard stood there silent, silent amid the ruins of the lives
which his own life had left behind. His wrinkled hand rose, shaking, to
touch at his half-moon glasses—
The boy poked his head back in. “Would you mind switching on the
stairs, Headmaster? I’d rather not go through all the work again to leave
the same way I came.”
“Go, Harry Potter,” the old wizard said. “The stairs will receive
you.”
(Some time later, an earlier version of Harry, who had invisibly
waited next to the gargoyles since 9pm, followed the Deputy Headmistress through the opening that parted for her, stood quietly behind
her on the turning stairs until they came to the top, and then, still under
the Cloak, spun his Time-Turner thrice.)

**
*

Aftermath: Professor Quirrell and —
In a shadowy clearing the Defense Professor waited, his back leaned negligently against the rough grey bark of a towering beech tree as yet unleaved in the late March days, so that its trunk and crown seemed like
a pale arm reaching up from the ground and exploding into a hand of
a thousand ﬁngers. Around the Defense Professor and above him were
branches so dense that even in the earliest spring, with few trees so much
as budding, you could have hardly seen the sky from the ground. The
strands of the wooden net crossed and proliferated so many times that
if you were on a broomstick above, searching for someone below, you
*

1252 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

would have found it easier to follow your ears than your eyes. Nor would
it have helped that it was almost dark amid the prohibited woods, the
unseen sun almost set, so that only a few glows of fading sunlight illuminated the tops of the tallest trees.
Then came the faintest sound of footsteps, almost inaudible even on
the forest ground; the gait of a man accustomed to passing unseen. No
twig snapped, nor leaf rustled—
“Good afternoon,” said Professor Quirrell. The Defense Professor
did not trouble to move his eyes, or his hands from where they rested
negligently at his side.
A ﬁgure clad in a black cloak shimmered into existence, his head
turning to look left and then right. In the ﬁgure’s right hand, gripped
low, was a wand of wood so grey it was almost silver.
“I do not know why you wished to meet here of all places,” said
Severus Snape, his voice cool.
“Oh,” Professor Quirrell said idly, as though the whole matter was of
the least importance, “I thought you would prefer privacy. The walls of
Hogwarts have ears, and you would not wish the Headmaster to know
of your role in yesterday’s aﬀair, would you?”
The March chill seemed to grow deeper, the temperature further fall.
“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” the Potions Master said icily.
“You know perfectly well what we’re talking about,” said Professor
Quirrell in an amused voice. “Really, my good Professor, you should
not meddle in the aﬀairs of idiots unless you are ready to defend yourself
upon the instant from all their violence.” (The Defense Professor’s hands
still lay relaxed and open at his side.) “And yet none of those idiots seem
to remember the sight of you falling, nor do the young ladies recall your
presence. Which begs the fascinating question of why you would go to
the extraordinary length, I dare say the desperate length, of casting ﬁftytwo Memory Charms.” Professor Quirrell tilted his head. “Would you
fear so much the opinions of mere students? I think not. Would you
dread the matter becoming known to your good friend, Lord Malfoy?
But those fools, upon the very spot, invented a quite satisfactory excuse
for your presence. No, there is only one person who holds so much
power over you, and who would be most perturbed to ﬁnd you executing
* 1253 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

any plot without his knowledge. Your true and hidden master, Albus
Dumbledore.”
“What?” hissed the Potions Master, the anger plain upon his face.
“But now, it seems, you are moving on your own; and so I ﬁnd myself most intrigued as to what you could possibly be doing, and why.”
The Defense Professor regarded the black-clad silhouette of the Potions
Master with the scrutiny a man might give an exceptionally interesting
bug, even if it was still ultimately just a bug.
“I am no servant of Dumbledore’s,” the Potions Master said coldly.
“Really? What astonishing news.” The Defense Professor smiled
slightly. “Do tell me all about it.”
There was a long pause. From some tree an owl hooted, the sound
huge in the silence; neither man startled or ﬂinched.
“You don’t want me as your enemy, Quirrell,” Severus Snape said,
his voice very soft.
“I don’t?” said Professor Quirrell. “How would you know?”
“On the other hand,” the Potions Master continued, voice still soft,
“my friends enjoy many advantages.”
The man leaning against the grey bark raised his eyebrows. “Such
as?”
“There is much that I know of this school,” said the Potions Master.
“Things I might not be expected to know.”
There was an expectant pause.
“How incredibly fascinating,” said Professor Quirrell. The man was
examining his ﬁngernails with a bored look. “Do go on.”
“I know you have been... investigating... the third-ﬂoor corridor—”
“You know nothing of the sort.” The man’s back straightened against
the wood. “Do not bluﬀ against me, Severus Snape; I ﬁnd it annoying,
and you are in no position to annoy me. A single glance would tell
any competent wizard that the Headmaster has laced that corridor with
a ridiculous quantity of wards and webs, triggers and tripsigns. And
more: there are Charms laid there of ancient power, magical constructs
of which I have heard not even rumors, techniques that must have been
disgorged from the hoarded lore of Flamel himself. Even He-Who-MustNot-Be-Named would have had trouble passing those without notice.”
* 1254 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

Professor Quirrell tapped a thoughtful ﬁnger on his cheek. “And for the
actual lock, a Colloportus laid on an ordinary doorknob, cast so weakly
that it could not have kept out Miss Granger on the day she entered
Hogwarts. I have never seen such an obvious trap in all my life.” Now
the Defense Professor narrowed his eyes. “I know of no one left in the
world against whom such fantastic feats of detection would serve any
useful purpose. If there is some wizard possessed of ancient lore, of
whom I know nothing, against whom this trap is set—you may trade
that information for as much silence as you like, my dear Professor, and
a good serving of my favor left over afterward.”
You could have sworn that Professor Quirrell was watching Severus
Snape with keen interest. Not the faintest trace of a smile crossed the
man’s lips.
There was another long silence in the clearing.
“I do not know who Dumbledore fears,” Snape said. “But I know
what bait he has set out, and somewhat of how it is truly guarded—”
“As to that,” said Professor Quirrell, sounding bored again, “I stole
it months ago, and left a fake in its place. But thank you kindly for
asking.”
“You’re lying,” said Severus Snape after a pause.
“Yes, I am.” Professor Quirrell leaned back against the grey wood
again, his eyes drifting up to the dense net of branches, the falling night
scarcely visible between the complex crossings. “I simply wished to learn
whether you would call me on it, since you are pretending to know so
little.” The Defense Professor smiled to himself.
The Potions Master looked like he was about to choke on his own
fury. “What do you want?”
“Nothing, really,” said the Defense Professor, continuing to gaze at
the forest ceiling. “I was only curious. I suppose I shall just watch and
see where your plotting goes, and meanwhile I will say nothing to the
Headmaster—so long as you are willing to do me a favor now and then,
of course.” A dry smile crossed the face. “You are dismissed for now,
Severus Snape. Though I wouldn’t mind having another little chat soon,
if you’re willing to speak with me honestly of where your loyalties lie.
And I do mean honestly, not the false faces you’ve shown today. You
* 1255 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

might ﬁnd you have more allies than you thought. Take some time to
think it over, my friend.”

**
*

Aftermath: Draco Malfoy and —
A rainbow hemisphere, not of solid color but of solid force that had
little chromaticity of its own, and yet sent back small portions of infringing light in splintered reﬂections, iridescent in many colors, as it
fractured the incoming light from the many-splendored chandeliers of
the Slytherin common room.
Sheltered beneath the rainbow hemisphere, the terriﬁed face of a
young witch who had never fought bullies, who had not joined any of
Professor Quirrell’s armies, who was getting Acceptable marks at best
in her Defense class, who could not have cast a Prismatic Barrier even to
save her own life.
“Oh, stop it,” said Draco Malfoy, making his voice sound bored despite the sweat that had broken out underneath his robes, as he kept his
wand pointed at the barrier that was sheltering Millicent Bulstrode.
He couldn’t remember making the decision, there’d just been the two
older boys about to hex Millicent, the common room silently staring,
and then Draco’s hand had just drawn his wand and cast the barrier,
leaving his heart to pump itself full of shocked adrenaline while his poor
sad brain frantically racked itself for explanations—
The two older boys were straightening up from where they’d been
looming over Millicent, turning to Draco, looking at him with a mixture
of shock and anger. Gregory and Vincent beside him had already drawn
their own wands, but weren’t pointing them. All three of them together
couldn’t have won, anyway—
But the older boys wouldn’t hex him. Nobody could possibly be
stupid enough to hex the next Lord Malfoy.
* 1256 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

It wasn’t fear of being hexed that was making Draco sweat beneath
his robes, as he desperately hoped the beads of water weren’t visible on
his forehead.
Draco was sweating because of the dawning and sickening certainty
that even if he got away with this now, if he kept down this path, there
would come a time when it would all come crashing down; and then he
might not be the next Lord Malfoy anymore.
“Mr. Malfoy,” said the oldest-looking boy. “Why are you protecting
her?”
“So you’ve located the mistress of the conspiracy,” Draco said in his
most sarcastic voice, “and it’s, let me get this straight now, a ﬁrst-year
girl named Millicent Bulstrode. She’s just a conduit, you niddlewit!”
“So?” demanded the older boy. “She still helped them!”
Draco lifted his wand and the Prismatic Sphere winked out. Still
talking in a bored voice, Draco said, “Did you know what you were
doing, Miss Bulstrode?”
“N-no,” Millicent stammered from where she was still sitting at her
desk.
“Did you know where the Slytherin messages you were passing on
were going to?”
“No!” said Millicent.
“Thank you,” Draco said. “All of you please leave her alone, she’s
just a pawn. Miss Bulstrode, you may consider the favor you did me in
February to have been repaid.” And Draco turned back to his Potions
homework, hoping to Merlin and back again that Millicent didn’t say
anything incredibly stupid like ‘What favor?’—
“Then why,” a voice said clearly from across the room, “did those
witches go where a note from Millicent told them to go?”
Sweating even more, Draco lifted his head again to look at where
Randolph Lee had spoken. “What did the fake note say exactly?” said
Draco. “Was it, ‘I command you to go forth in the name of the Dark
Lady Bulstrode’ or ‘Please meet me here, sincerely Millicent?’”
Randolph Lee opened his mouth, hesitated for a fractional second—
“I thought so,” said Draco. “That wasn’t a very good test, Mr. Lee,
it—it can—” A frantic, nerve-racking moment while he ﬁgured out how
*

1257 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

to say it without using Harry-words like false positive. “It can get the
witches to go there if any of them is just friends with Millicent.”
As though the matter had been entirely settled, Draco looked down
again at his Potions homework, ignoring (except for the feeling of sick
dread in his stomach) some of the whispers from around the room.
It was only out of the corner of his eye that he caught Gregory staring
at him.

**
*
Draco’s eyes rested on his Astronomy homework, but he couldn’t make
his mind focus there. If you were trying not to think about things Harry
Potter had said, pretty much the worst possible thing you could do was
look at your textbook’s pictures of the night sky, and try to remember
what you weren’t supposed to know about how the planets wandered.
Astronomy, a noble and prestigious art, a sign of learning and knowledge; only Muggles possessed secret modern artifacts which could do
it a million billion times better using methods that Harry had tried to
explain and which Draco still couldn’t begin to understand except that
apparently it didn’t even take magic to make things do Arithmancy.
Draco looked at the pictures of constellations, and wondered if it
was like this in the other Houses, if people were always threatening each
other in Ravenclaw.
Harry Potter had told him once that soldiers on a battleﬁeld didn’t
really ﬁght for their country. The country might get them to the battleﬁeld in the ﬁrst place, but once they were there, they fought to protect
each other, the friends who were right in front of them. And Harry had
observed, and Draco had known that it was true, that you wouldn’t be
able to use loyalty to a leader to power a Patronus Charm, it wasn’t quite
the right kind of happy thought. But thinking of protecting someone
beside you—
That, Harry Potter had said thoughtfully, was probably why the
Death Eaters had fallen apart the moment the Dark Lord had departed.
They hadn’t been warm enough to each other.
* 1258 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

You could recruit a group that included Bellatrix Black and Amycus
Carrow alongside Lord Malfoy and Mr. MacNair, and keep them in line
with the Cruciatus Curse. But the instant the master of the Dark Mark
was gone, you didn’t have an army anymore, you had a circle of acquaintances. That was why Father had failed. It hadn’t even really been his
fault. There’d been nothing Father could have done, after inheriting the
Death Eaters from a Dark Lord who couldn’t have cast the Patronus
Charm with twelve buckets of chocolate and the Unbeatable Wand.
And even though it was Slytherin House that he was supposed to be
protecting, that he and Harry had formed a pact to save, Draco couldn’t
help but think sometimes that it was just less wearisome when he was
in his General’s oﬃce or leading army practices. When he was working
with the students from the other three Houses that weren’t Slytherin.
Once you saw and named the problems, you couldn’t stop seeing them,
it just got more annoying every day.
“Mr. Malfoy?” said the voice of Gregory Goyle, from where he was
laying on the ﬂoor beside Draco’s desk, in the small but private bedroom. Gregory was doing his Transﬁguration homework and not uncommonly needed to give up and ask for help.
“Yes?” Draco said, feeling glad for the distraction—
“You weren’t really plotting against Granger at all,” said Gregory.
“Were you?”
The sensation spreading through Draco’s stomach felt just like Gregory’s voice sounded, sickened and afraid.
“You actually were helping Granger, that day you picked her up oﬀ
the ﬂoor,” said Gregory. “And before, that time you kept her from falling
oﬀ the roof. You helped a mudblood—”
“Yeah, right,” Draco said sarcastically, without the slightest hesitation or delay, looking back down at his Astronomy homework like he
wasn’t the least bit nervous. It was all happening exactly the way Draco
had been afraid it would, but at least that did mean he’d played this conversation in his head over and over, coming up with the right opening
gambit. “Come on, Gregory, you’ve dueled General Granger, you know
how strong her spells are. Like a real Muggle-spawn is going to be more
powerful than you, more powerful than Theodore, more powerful than
* 1259 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

every single pureblood in our whole school year except me? Don’t you
actually believe in anything Father says? She’s adopted. Her parents died
in the war and someone stuck her with a couple of Muggles to hide her.
No way is General Granger a real mudblood.”
A slow beat of silence through Draco’s bedroom. Draco wanted to
know, needed to know what look was on Gregory’s face. But he couldn’t
look up from his desk, not yet, not until Gregory spoke ﬁrst.
And then—
“Is that what Harry Potter said to you?” said Gregory.
The voice wavered, and broke. When Draco looked up from his
homework, he saw that tears were leaking out of Gregory’s eyes.
Okay, that hadn’t worked.
“I don’t know what to do,” Gregory said in a whisper. “I don’t know
what to do now, Mr. Malfoy. Your father isn’t—when he ﬁnds out—he’s
not going to like it, Mr. Malfoy!”
It’s not your job to decide what Father will like, Goyle—
Draco could hear the words in his head; they sounded in Father’s
voice, with the same sternness. It was the sort of thing Father had told
him to say, if Vincent or Gregory ever questioned him; and if that didn’t
work he was to hex them. They were not equal friends, Father had said,
and he wasn’t ever to forget it. Draco was in charge, they were his servants, and if Draco couldn’t keep it that way then he wasn’t ﬁt to inherit
House Malfoy.
Draco looked at the other boy for a long moment, thinking about
some of the bits of scientiﬁc history he’d read. Unless he’d gone to the
trouble of making up whole books, Harry really hadn’t been lying about
how scientists were always doing better than their forefathers, how you
were expected to contradict your ancestors about a few things...
“It’s all right, Gregory,” Draco said, as gently as he could. “All
you’ve got to do is worry about protecting me. Nobody’s going to blame
you for following my orders, not my father, not yours.” Putting all the
warmth he could into his voice, like trying to cast a Patronus Charm.
“And anyway, the next war isn’t going to be the same as the last one.
House Malfoy was around long before the Dark Lord, and not every
Lord Malfoy does the same thing. Father knows that.”
* 1260 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

“Does he?” said Gregory in trembling voice. “Does he really?”
Draco nodded. “Professor Quirrell knows it too,” said Draco.
“That’s what the armies are about. The Defense Professor’s right, when
the next war comes, Father won’t be able to unite the whole country,
they’ll remember the last war. But anyone who’s fought in Professor
Quirrell’s armies will remember who the strongest generals were, they’ll
know who’s worthy to lead them. They’ll proclaim Harry Potter their
Lord, and I’ll be his right hand, and House Malfoy will come out on top,
like always. People might even turn to me, if Potter isn’t there, so long
as they think I’m trustworthy. That’s what I’m setting up now. Father
will understand.”
Gregory reached up and wiped his eyes, looking down again at his
Transﬁguration homework. “Okay,” Gregory said in a shaky voice. “If
you say so, Mr. Malfoy.”
Draco nodded again, ignoring the hollow feeling inside himself at the
lies he’d just told his friend, and turned back to the stars.

**
*

Aftermath: Hermione Granger and —
Being invisible should’ve been more interesting than this, the corridors
of Hogwarts should have been outlined in strange colors, or something.
But actually, Hermione Granger thought, being under Harry’s invisibility cloak was exactly like not being under an invisibility cloak, except
for the cloak part. When you pulled the veil of soft black cloth down
from the hood and over your face, you couldn’t even see it stretching in
front of you, and afterward it didn’t seem to impede your breathing any.
And the world looked just the same, except that when you walked past
things of metal, you didn’t see any small reﬂections of yourself. Portraits never looked at you, only did whatever strange things they did
when they were alone. Hermione hadn’t tried walking past a mirror
*

1261 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

yet, she wasn’t sure she wanted to. And most of all, there was no you
anymore as you walked around, no hands, no feet, just a changing point
of view. It was an unnerving feeling, not so much of being invisible as
being not there.
Harry hadn’t questioned her at all, she’d just got out the words
‘invisibility cloak’ and then Harry was drawing his invisibility cloak,
which might or might not have been a Deathly Hallow, from his pouch.
She hadn’t needed to explain about her extremely secret meeting with
Daphne and Millicent Bulstrode, or that she thought it was necessary to
help protect the other girls, Harry had just nodded and handed it over. If
you were fair, and she did try to be fair, she had to admit that sometimes
Harry could be a very true, true friend.
The secret meeting itself had been a great big failure.
Millicent had claimed to be a seer.
Hermione had carefully explained to Millicent and Daphne at some
length that this could not possibly be true.
She and Harry had looked up Divination early on in their research,
reading everything they could ﬁnd that wasn’t in the Restricted Section.
As Harry had observed, it would save a lot of eﬀort if they could just
get a seer to prophesy everything they would ﬁgure out thirty-ﬁve years
later. (Or to put it in Harry’s terms, any means of obtaining information transmitted from the distant future was potentially an instant global
victory condition.)
But, as Hermione had explained to Millicent, prophesying wasn’t
controllable, there was no way to ask for a prophecy about anything in
particular. Instead there was this sort of pressure that built up in Time,
the books had said, when some huge event was trying to happen, or
stop itself from happening. And seers were like weak points that let out
the pressure, when the right listener was nearby. So prophecies were
only about big, important things; and you almost never got more than
one seer saying the same thing, because afterward the pressure was gone.
And, as Hermione had further explained to Millicent, the seers themselves didn’t remember their prophecies, because the message wasn’t for
them, it was for the person that would bring about events by hearing the
prophecy. And the messages would come out in riddles, and only some* 1262 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

one who heard the prophecy in the seer’s original voice would hear all
the meaning that was in the riddle. There was no possible way that Millicent could just give out a prophecy any time she wanted, about school
bullies, and then remember it, and if she had it would’ve come out as ‘the
skeleton is the key’ and not ‘Susan Bones has to be there’.
Millicent had been looking rather frightened at this point, so Hermione had relaxed her ﬁsts where they’d been jammed on her hips, calmed
herself down, and stated carefully that while she was glad Millicent had
helped them, they had sometimes gone into traps following what Millicent said, and so Hermione really did want to know where the messages
had actually come from.
And Millicent had said in a small voice:
But, but she told me that she was a seer...
Hermione had told Daphne not to press it, after Millicent had refused to give up her source. It wasn’t just that Hermione had felt awful
about the scared look on Millicent’s face. It was that Hermione had a
strong feeling that if they did ﬁnd the person who’d been telling Millicent things, why, they would turn out to just be ﬁnding envelopes under
their pillow in the morning.
She was getting that same despairing feeling she’d gotten in the battle
before Christmas, looking at Zabini’s charts with all the colored lines
and boxes and... and she had only just now realized what it meant that
Zabini had been the one showing her that chart.
Even for a Ravenclaw, she felt, there was such a thing as having your
life get overly complicated.
Hermione began ascending a short spiral of yellow marble steps protruding from a central spine, a poorly-kept “secret” staircase that was
actually one of the fastest ways up from the Slytherin dungeons to the
Ravenclaw tower, but which only witches could use. (Why girls in particular needed a quick way to move from Ravenclaw to Slytherin and
back was something Hermione found a bit puzzling.) At the top of
the staircase, now that she was away from Slytherin places, Hermione
stopped and took oﬀ Harry’s invisibility cloak.
After her pouch had swallowed the cloak, Hermione turned right
and started to walk down a short passageway, now automatically keeping
* 1263 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

an eye out in all directions without really thinking about it, and her
constantly-scanning eyes glanced into a shadowy alcove—
—she felt a momentary sense of disorientation—
—and then a rush of shock and fear hit her like a Stunning Hex over
her whole body, her body jerked around so fast it was like she had Apparated, she found that without any thought or any conscious decision
her wand had leaped into her hand and was already pointed at...
...a black cloak so wide and billowing that it was impossible to determine whether the ﬁgure beneath was male or female, and atop the cloak
a broad-brimmed black hat; and a black mist seemed to gather beneath
it and obscure the face of whoever or whatever might lie beneath.
“Hello again, Hermione,” whispered a sibilant voice from beneath
the black hat, from behind the black mist.
Hermione’s heart was already pounding hugely inside her chest, her
witch’s robes felt already sweat-dampened against her skin, there was
a taste of fear already in her mouth; she didn’t know why she was so
suddenly ﬁlled up with adrenaline but her hand gripped harder on her
wand. “Who are you?” Hermione demanded.
The hat tilted slightly; the whispery voice, when it came forth from
the black mist, sounded dry as dust. “The last ally,” spoke the sibilant
whisper. “The one who ﬁnally answers, when no other will answer you.
I am perhaps the only true friend you have in all Hogwarts, Hermione.
For you have now seen how the others stayed silent when you were in
need—”
“What’s your name?”
The black cloak rotated slightly, back and forth, it didn’t look like
shoulders shrugging, but it conveyed a shrug. “That is the riddle, young
Ravenclaw. Until you solve it, you may call me whatever you wish.”
She could feel her palm already sweaty and was thankful for the spiral grooves on her wand that helped her hand keep a steady grip on
the wood. “Well, Mister Incredibly Suspicious Person,” Hermione said,
“what do you want with me?”
“That is the wrong question,” came the whisper from black mist.
“You should ask, rather, what I can oﬀer you.”
“No,” the young girl said quite steadily, “I don’t think I should be
* 1264 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

asking that, actually.”
A high-pitched chuckle from behind the black mist. “Not power,”
whispered the voice, “not wealth, you care little for such things, do you,
young Ravenclaw? Knowledge. That is what I possess. I know what is
unfolding within this school, all the hidden plans and players, the answers of the riddle. I know the true reason for the coldness you see
in Harry Potter’s eyes. I know the true nature of Professor Quirrell’s
mysterious illness. I know who Dumbledore truly fears.”
“Good for you,” said Hermione Granger. “But do you know how
many licks it takes to get to the Tootsie Roll center of a Tootsie Pop?”
The black mist seemed to darken slightly, the voice sounded lower
when it spoke, disappointed. “So you are not even curious, young
Ravenclaw, about the truths behind the lies?”
“One hundred and eighty-seven,” she said. “I tried it once and that’s
how many it came out to.” Her hand was almost slipping on her wand,
there was a sense of fatigue in her ﬁngers like she’d been holding the
wand for hours instead of minutes—
The cold voice hissed, “Professor Snape is a hidden Death Eater.”
Hermione almost dropped her wand.
“Ah,” the voice whispered in satisfaction. “I thought that might interest you. So, Hermione. Is there anything else you would like to know
about your enemies, or those you call friends?”
She stared up at the black mist that topped the towering black cloak,
frantically trying to order her thoughts. Professor Snape was a Death
Eater? Who would tell her something like that, why, what was going on?
“That’s—” Hermione said. Her voice was quavering. “That’s extremely
serious business, if it’s really true. Why are you telling something like
that to me, and not to Headmaster Dumbledore?”
“Dumbledore did nothing to stop Snape,” the black mist whispered.
“You saw it, Hermione. The rot at Hogwarts begins at the top. Everything that is wrong with this school, it all begins with the mad Headmaster. You alone dared to call him out for it—and therefore I speak to
you.”
“And have you also spoken to Harry Potter, then?” Hermoine said,
keeping her voice as even as she could. If this was his helpful ghost—
* 1265 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

The black mist darkened and lightened, like a shake of the head. “I
am frightened of Harry Potter,” it whispered. “Of the coldness in his
eyes, of the darkness that grows behind them. Harry Potter is a killer,
and anyone who is an obstacle to him will die. Even you, Hermione
Granger, if you dare truly oppose him, the darkness behind his eyes will
reach out and destroy you. This I know.”
“Then you don’t know half of what you pretend to know,” Hermione said, her voice a little ﬁrmer. “I’m scared of Harry too. But not
because of what he might ever do to me. I’m scared of what he might do
to protect me—”
“Wrong.” The whisper was ﬂat, and hard, as if to brook no possibility
of denial. “Harry Potter will turn against you in time, Hermione, when
the darkness takes him fully. He will not shed a tear, he will not even
notice, on the day his footsteps ﬁnally crush you underneath.”
“Double wrong!” she said back in a rising voice, even though there
were chills going down her spine. One of Harry’s phrases came to her.
“Just what do you think you know, and how do you think you know it,
anyway?”
“Time—” The voice seemed to catch itself. “Time enough for that
later. For now, for today, indeed Harry Potter is not your enemy. And
yet you are in gravest danger.”
“I can believe that,” said Hermione Granger. She desperately wanted
to shift her wand to her other hand, she felt like she needed to grab her
right arm just to keep it up, her head ached like she’d been staring at the
black mist for days; she didn’t know why she’d gotten tired so quickly.
“Lucius Malfoy has taken notice of you, Hermione.” The whisper
had risen, departed from its tonelessness, taken on a note of audible concern. “You have humiliated Slytherin House, you have defeated his son
in battle. Even before then you were an embarrassment to all who stand
with the Death Eaters; for you are a Muggleborn and yet you possess a
power of wizardry greater than any pureblood. And now you are becoming known, the eyes of the world on you. Lucius Malfoy seeks to
crush you, Hermione, to hurt you and perhaps even kill you, and he has
the means to do it!” The whisper had grown urgent.
There was a pause.
* 1266 *

**
*

SELF-ACTUALIZATION, AFTERMATHS:
SURFACE APPEARANCES

*
*

*

“Is that all?” Hermione said. If she was ex-Colonel Zabini or Harry
Potter, she’d probably be asking clever questions to gather more information; but her mind felt slow and fatigued. She really needed to get out
of here and go lie down for a while.
“You don’t believe me,” the whisper said, softer and sadder now.
“Why not, Hermione? I am trying to help you.”
Hermione took a step backward, away from the shadowy alcove.
“Why not, Hermione?” demanded the voice, rising to a hiss. “You
owe me that much! Tell me, and then—” The voice caught, and came
back quieter. “And then you can go, I suppose. Only tell me—why—”
Maybe she shouldn’t’ve answered; maybe she should’ve just turned
and ﬂed, or better yet, cast a Prismatic Wall ﬁrst and then screamed at
the top of her lungs as she ran; but it was the note of real pain in the
voice that caught her, and so she answered.
“Because you look incredibly dark and scary and suspicious,” Hermione said, keeping her voice polite, as her wand stayed level on the
towering black cloak and the faceless black mist.
“That’s all?” whispered the voice incredulously. Sadness seemed to
infuse it. “I hoped for better from you, Hermione. Surely such a Ravenclaw as you, the most intelligent Ravenclaw to grace Hogwarts in a generation, knows that appearances can be misleading.”
“Oh, I know it,” said Hermione. She took another step back, her
tired ﬁngers tightening on the wand. “But the thing that people forget
sometimes, is that even though appearances can be misleading, they’re
usually not.”
There was a pause.
“You are the clever one,” said the voice, and the black mist evaporated
away, no longer obscuring; recognition sent a jolt of terriﬁed adrenaline
bursting through her—
—she felt a momentary sense of disorientation—
—and then a rush of shock and fear hit her like a Stunning Hex over
her whole body, her body jerked around so fast it was like she had Apparated, she found that without any thought or any conscious decision
her wand had leaped into her hand and was already pointed at...
...a shining lady, her long white dress billowing about her as though
* 1267 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-SE V EN

*
*

*

in invisible winds; neither her hands nor her feet were visible, her face
hidden beneath a white veil; and she was glowing all over, not like a
ghost, not transparent, just surrounded by soft white light.
Hermione stared open-mouthed at the gentle sight, wondering why
her heart was already hammering, and why she felt so scared.
“Hello again, Hermione,” the kindly whisper emanated from the
white glow behind the veil. “I’ve been sent to help you, so please don’t
be afraid. I am your servant in all things; for you, my Lady, are the
bearer of a most marvelous destiny—”
...
...
...

* 1268 *

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

TABOO TRADEOFFS
PRELUDE:
CHEATING
t was Saturday, on the 4th of April, in the year 1992.
Mr. and Mrs. Davis looked rather nervous, as they sat in a certain special section of the Hogwarts Quidditch stands—though today
the cushioned benches did not look upon ﬂying broomsticks, but rather
viewed a gigantic square of something like parchment; a great white
blankness soon to ﬂicker with windows into grass and soldiers. For
now it showed only the reﬂected dull gray color of the surrounding
overcast skies. (Looking rather stormy, though the weather-wizards had
promised that the rain wouldn’t break before nightfall.)
Ordinarily it was the ancient tradition of Hogwarts that mere parents
were to Stay Out—for much the same reason that impatient children are
told to get out of the kitchen and not meddle in the cook’s aﬀairs. The
only reason for a parent-teacher conference was if a teacher felt that a
parent wasn’t shaping up properly. It took an exceptional circumstance
to make the Hogwarts administration feel that it had to justify itself to
you. On any given occasion, generally speaking, the Hogwarts administration was backed up by eight hundred years of distinguished history
and you were not.
Thus it had been with some trepidation that Mr. and Mrs. Davis had
insisted on an audience with Deputy Headmistress McGonagall. It was
hard to muster a proper sense of indignation when you were confronting
the same digniﬁed witch who, twelve years and four months earlier, had

I

* 1269 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

given both of you two weeks’ detention after catching you in the act of
conceiving Tracey.
On the other hand, Mr. and Mrs. Davis’s courage had been helped
by angrily waving about a copy of The Quibbler whose headline showed,
in bright bold text for all the world to see:
Pacts with Potter?
Bones, Davis, Granger
In Love Rectangle of Fear
And so Mr. and Mrs. Davis had argued their way into the Faculty
Box of the Hogwarts Quidditch stands, where they were now ensconced
with an excellent view of Professor Quirrell’s enchanted screens, so that
the two of them could see for themselves “Just what the Fiddly-Snocks
has been going on in this school, if you’ll pardon the expression, Deputy
Headmistress McGonagall!”
Seated to the left of Mr. Davis was another concerned parent, a whitehaired man in elegant black robes of unmatchable quality, one Lucius
Malfoy, political leader of the strongest faction of the Wizengamot.
To the left of Lord Malfoy, a sneeringly aristocratic man with a
scarred face who had been introduced to them as Lord Jugson.
Then an elderly but sharp-eyed fellow named Charles Nott, rumored
to be nearly as wealthy as Lord Malfoy, seated on Lord Jugson’s left.
On the right of Mrs. Davis, one would ﬁnd the comely Lady and yet
handsomer Lord of the Noble and Most Ancient House of Greengrass.
Young they were as wizards counted age, garbed in grey silken robes set
with tiny dark emeralds embroidered into the shape of grass blades. The
Lady Greengrass was considered a key swing vote on the Wizengamot,
her own mother having retired from the body with surprising speed.
Her charming husband, though his family was not noble or wealthy of
itself, had taken a seat on the Hogwarts Board of Governors.
To their right, a square-jawed and incredibly tough-looking old
witch, who had shaken hands with Mr. and Mrs. Davis without the
slightest hint of condescension. This was Amelia Bones, Director of
the Department of Magical Law Enforcement.
* 1270 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

To Amelia’s right was a seniorish woman who had set the fashion
scene of magical Britain on its ear by integrating a live vulture into her
hat, one Augusta Longbottom. Though she was not addressed as Lady,
Madam Longbottom would exercise the full rights of the Longbottom
family for so long as their last scion had yet to attain his majority, and
she was considered a prominent ﬁgure in a minority faction of the Wizengamot.
At the side of Madam Longbottom was seated none other than Chief
Warlock Supreme Mugwump Headmaster Albus Percival Wulfric Brian
Dumbledore, legendary defeater of Grindelwald, protector of Britain,
rediscoverer of the fabled twelve uses of dragon’s blood, the most powerful wizard in the world &c.
And ﬁnally, on the far right, one would ﬁnd the enigmatic Defense
Professor of Hogwarts, Quirinus Quirrell, who was leaning back on the
cushioned benches as though resting; seeming entirely and naturally at
ease in the rareﬁed company of a voting quorum of the Hogwarts Board
of Governors, which had dropped by on this ﬁne Saturday to learn just
what the Fiddly-Snocks had been going on at Hogwarts in general and
with Draco Malfoy, Theodore Nott, Daphne Greengrass, Susan Bones,
and Neville Longbottom in particular. The name of Harry Potter had
also been much discussed.
Oh, and one mustn’t forget Tracey Davis, of course. Director
Bones’s eyebrows had climbed in some interest upon hearing the young
couple introduced as her parents. Lord Jugson had given them a brief, incredulous stare before dismissing them with a snort. Lucius Malfoy had
greeted them politely, his smile containing a hint of grim amusement
mixed with pity.
Mr. and Mrs. Davis, whose last vote on anything of signiﬁcance had
been touching their wands to the name of Minister Fudge, who had all of
three hundred Galleons stored in their Gringotts vault, and who respectively worked at selling cauldrons in a Potions shop and enchanting Omnioculars, were pressed up tightly against each other, sitting rigidly erect
upon their cushioned benches, and desperately wishing they’d worn
nicer robes.
The sky above was a solid mass of cloud dispersed into darker and
*

1271 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

lighter grays, grim with the promise of future storms; though no lightning ﬂickered as yet, nor distant rumbles of thunder echoed; and only a
few threatening droplets had fallen.

**
*
To their designated starting place in a certain forest, the Sunshine Regiment marched, though it was really more like a slow walk; you wouldn’t
want to tire yourself out before the battle even started, and the breezes
of April were annoyingly humid, though cool. Ahead of them, a yellow
ﬂame wandered slowly through the air, guiding them according to their
pace.
Susan Bones kept throwing worried glances toward the Sunshine
General as they marched through the grayly illuminated forest. Professor Snape’s going after Hermione seemed to have really shaken her.
Hermione had even missed her Sunshine Regiment Oﬃcial Planning
Meeting, which seemed understandable enough; but when Susan had
oﬀered her sympathy afterward, Hermione had stammered that she’d
lost track of time, which wasn’t at all a usual thing for her to say, and
the girl had looked exhausted and frightened like she’d just spent three
days locked in a bathroom stall with a Dementor. Even now, when all
the Sunshine General’s focus should’ve been on the coming battle, the
Ravenclaw girl’s gaze was constantly darting in all directions, as though
she expected Dark Wizards to jump out of the bushes and sacriﬁce her.
“The ban on Muggle artifacts cuts down our options a lot,” Anthony
Goldstein was saying in the dour tones the boy used to denote deliberate
pessimism. “I had the idea of trying to Transﬁgure nets to throw on
people, but—”
“No good,” said Ernie Macmillan. The Huﬄepuﬀ boy shook his
head, looking even more serious than Anthony. “I mean, it’s just like
throwing a hex, they’d dodge.”
Anthony nodded. “That’s what I ﬁgured, too. Do you have any
ideas, Seamus?”
*

1272 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

The former Chaotic Lieutenant still looked a bit nervous and outof-place, marching along with his new comrades in the Sunshine Regiment. “Sorry,” said the newly minted Captain Finnigan. “I’m more the
strategic master type.”
“I’m the strategic master type,” said Ron Weasley, sounding put-oﬀ.
“There are three armies,” the Sunshine General said acerbically,
“which means we ﬁght two armies at once, which means we need more
than one strategist, which means shut up, Ron!”
Ron gave their General a surprised and worried look. “Hey,” the
Gryﬃndor boy said in a calming tone, “you shouldn’t let Snape get to
you so much—”
“What do you think we ought to do, General?” Susan said very loudly
and quickly. “I mean, we don’t really have a plan at this point.” Their
oﬃcial planning session had failed amazingly with Hermione gone and
both Ron and Anthony thinking they were in charge.
“Do we really need a plan?” the Sunshine General said, sounding
a little distracted. “We’ve got you and me and Lavender and Parvati
and Hannah and Daphne and Ron and Ernie and Anthony and Captain
Finnigan.”
“That—” began Anthony.
“Sounds like a pretty good strategy,” Ron said with an approving
nod. “We’ve got as many strong soldiers now as both other armies put
together. Chaos’s only got Potter and Longbottom and Nott left —well,
and Zabini too, I suppose—”
“And Tracey,” said Hermione.
Several people swallowed nervously.
“Oh, stop it,” Susan said sharply. “She’s just a battle-hardened member of sphew, that’s all General Sunshine means.”
“Still,” Ernie said, turning to look seriously at Susan, “I think you’d
better go with whatever group ﬁghts Chaos, Captain Bones. I know
you can’t use your double magical powers except when innocents are in
danger, but I mean—just in case Miss Davis does, you know, go out of
control and try to eat someone’s soul—”
“I can handle her,” Susan told him, keeping her voice reassuring.
Admittedly, Susan hadn’t been replaced by a Metamorphmagus at the
* 1273 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

moment, but then Tracey probably wasn’t Polyjuiced Dumbledore or
whoever.
Captain Finnigan intoned in a deep, sort-of-rumbling voice, “I ﬁnd
your lack of skepticism disturbing.” He raised his hand with his thumb
and foreﬁnger almost touching, pointed at Ernie.
For some reason Anthony Goldstein seemed to be having a sudden
choking ﬁt. “What’s that supposed to mean?” said Ernie.
“It’s just something General Potter says sometimes,” said Captain
Finnigan. “Funny, when you ﬁrst join the Chaos Legion it all seems
crazy, and then after a couple of months you realize that actually everyone who isn’t in the Chaos Legion is crazy —”
“I said,” Ron said loudly, “it sounds like good strategy. We don’t
Transﬁgure anything, we don’t tire ourselves out, we handle whatever
they throw at us, and then we just overrun them.”
“Okay,” said Hermione. “Let’s do that.”
“But—” said Anthony, shooting a glare at Ron. “But General, Harry
Potter’s got sixteen people left in his army. Dragon and us each have
twenty-eight. Harry knows that, he knows he’s got to come up with
something incredible—”
“Like what?” demanded Hermione, sounding stressed. “If we don’t
know what he’s planning, we might as well save our magic for doing
massed Finites. Like we should’ve done last time!”
Susan touched Hermione gently on the shoulder. “General Granger?” said Susan. “I think you should take a break for a bit before the
battle.”
She’d been expecting Hermione to argue, but Hermione just nodded
and then walked a little faster, pulling away from the Sunshine Regiment
Oﬃcial Oﬃcer Group, her eyes still watching the forest, and sometimes
the sky.
Susan followed her. It wouldn’t do, having it look like the Sunshine
General was being ejected from her own Oﬃcial Oﬃcer Group.
“Hermione?” Susan said softly, after they’d walked a bit away.
“You’ve got to focus. Professor Quirrell’s in charge here, not Snape,
and he won’t let anything bad happen to you or anyone.”
“You’re not helping,” Hermione said, sounding shaky. “You’re not
*

1274 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

helping at all, Captain Bones.”
The two of them walked faster, circling around some of the other soldiers, inspecting the marching perimeter and glancing at the surrounding
trees.
“Susan?” Hermione said in a small voice, when they’d gotten further
away from all the others. “Do you think Daphne’s right about Draco
Malfoy plotting something?”
“Yes,” Susan said at once, not even thinking about it. “You can tell,
because his name’s got the letters M-A-L-F-O and Y in it.”
Hermione looked around, as if to make sure that nobody was watching, although of course that was a wonderful way to get other people
to pay attention to you. “Could Malfoy have been behind what Snape
did?”
“Snape could be behind Malfoy,” Susan said thoughtfully, remembering dinner-table conversations she’d heard at Auntie’s, “or Lucius Malfoy
could be behind both of them.” A slight chill went down Susan’s spine
as this last thought occurred to her. Suddenly, telling Hermione to just
focus on the coming battle seemed a lot less reasonable. “Why, did you
ﬁnd some sort of clue about that?”
Hermione shook her head. “No,” the Ravenclaw girl said, in a voice
that sounded almost like she was about to cry. “I was—just thinking
about it myself—that’s all.”

**
*
In their designated place in a forest near Hogwarts, the Dragon General
and the warriors of Dragon Army waited where their red ﬂame had led
them, beneath grey skies.
At Draco’s right side stood Padma Patil, his second-in-command,
who had once led all of Dragon Army after Draco had been stunned.
At Draco’s back was Vincent, the son of Crabbe, a family which had
served the Malfoys into the distance of forgotten memory; the muscular
boy was watchful as he was always watchful, whether battle had been declared or no. Further back, Gregory of the Goyles stood waiting beside
one of the two broomsticks Dragon Army had been given; if the Goyles
*

1275 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

had not served the Malfoys so long as the Crabbes, yet they had served
no less well.
And at Draco’s left side, now, stood one Dean Thomas of Gryﬃndor,
a mudblood or possible half-blood who knew nothing of his father.
Sending Dean Thomas to Dragon Army had been a quite deliberate
move on Harry’s part, Draco was certain. Three other former Chaotics
had also been transferred to Dragon Army, and all were watching Draco
hawklike to see if he oﬀered the former Lieutenant the slightest insult.
Some might have called it sabotage, but Draco knew better. Harry
had also sent Lieutenant Finnigan to the Sunshine Regiment, even
though Professor Quirrell’s mandate had only required that Harry give
up one Lieutenant. That too had been a deliberate move, making crystal
clear to everyone that Harry wasn’t dumping his least-favored soldiers.
In one sense, it might have been easier for Draco to win the true
loyalties of his new soldiers if they’d thought Harry hadn’t wanted them.
In another sense... well, it wasn’t easy to put into words. Harry had
given him good soldiers with their pride intact, but it was more than
that. Harry had showed kindliness toward his soldiers, but it was more
than that. It wasn’t just Harry playing fair, it was something that... that
you couldn’t help but contrast with the way the game was played in
Slytherin House.
So Draco hadn’t oﬀered the slightest insult to Mr. Thomas, but
brought him straight to his side, subordinate to himself and Padma but
no one else. It was a test, Draco had told Mr. Thomas and everyone, not
a promotion. Mr. Thomas would have to show himself worthy of rank
within Dragon Army—but he would be given a chance, and the chance
would be fair. Mr. Thomas had looked surprised at the ceremony of it
(the Chaos Legion, from what Draco had heard, didn’t stand on formality) but the Gryﬃndor boy had stood a little straighter, and nodded.
And then, after Mr. Thomas had done well enough in one of Dragon
Army’s training sessions, he’d been brought into the strategy session
in Dragon Army’s huge military oﬃce. And a few minutes into the
session, Padma had happened to ask—as though it was a perfectly normal
question—whether Mr. Thomas had any ideas about how to defeat the
Chaos Legion.
*

1276 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

The Gryﬃndor boy had said cheerfully that Harry had predicted
that General Malfoy would get one of his soldiers to ask him that, and
that Harry had given him the message that General Malfoy should ask
himself where his relative advantage lay—what Draco Malfoy could do,
or what Dragon Army could do, that the Chaos Legion couldn’t match—
and then try to exploit it for all it was worth. Dean Thomas couldn’t
think of what that advantage might be, but if he did come up with any
ideas for beating Chaos, he’d share them. Harry had ordered him to,
after all.
Sigh, Draco had thought, since he couldn’t actually sigh out loud. But
it was good advice, and Draco had followed it, sitting at his bedroom desk
with quill and parchment listing out everything that might be a relative
advantage.
And, almost to Draco’s own surprise, he’d had an idea, a real one. In
fact he’d had two.
The hollow bell sounded through the forest, somehow sounding
more ominous than ever before. On the instant, the two pilots cried
“Up!” and leapt onto their broomsticks, heading into the gray sky.

**
*
Mr. and Mrs. Davis had now slumped slightly against each other, more
from sheer muscle exhaustion than from any decrease of tension. Before
them, the vast blank white parchment ﬂickered with three great windows, as though holes had been cut through into the forest, showing
three armies on the march. Lesser windows showed the six riders upon
their broomsticks, and the corner of the parchment showed a view of
the entire forest, with glowing dots to indicate armies and scouts.
The window into Sunshine showed General Granger and her Captains marching in the center of the Sunshine Regiment, protected by
Contego screens along with a number of other young witches. The Sunshine Regiment, the Defense Professor had remarked, knew well that
it had now acquired a strong advantage in experienced soldiers, and it
meant to protect those soldiers from a surprise attack. Aside from that,
* 1277 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

the Sunshine Soldiers were moving forward at a steady march, conserving their strength.
The soldiers in General Malfoy’s army, at least those with higher
Transﬁguration scores, were picking up leaves and Transﬁguring them
into... well, if you looked at Padma Patil, who was almost done with
hers, it looked like her leaf was becoming a left-handed glove bearing a
dangling strap. (The window had zoomed in to show this.)
Lord Jugson was watching the screen with a ﬂat expression; his voice,
when he spoke, seemed to ooze and drip with disdain. “What is your
son doing, Lucius?”
The foreign-born witch who stood at Draco Malfoy’s right side had
ﬁnished Transﬁguring her glove, and was now bringing it before the
Dragon General like a sacriﬁce.
“I do not know,” said Lucius Malfoy, his tone calm though no less
aristocratic, “but I must trust that he has good reason for doing it.”
All Dragon Army stopped for a moment as Padma slid the glove over
her left hand, strapped it in place, and presented it before Draco Malfoy;
who also stopped in place, took several deep breaths, raised his wand,
executed a precise set of eight movements and bellowed “Colloportus!”
The Dragon Warrior raised her gloved hand, ﬂexed it, and gave a
small bow to Draco Malfoy, who returned it more shallowly, though
the Dragon General was staggering slightly. Padma then returned to her
place at Draco’s side, and the Dragons began marching once more.
“Well,” remarked Augusta Longbottom. “I don’t suppose someone
would care to explain?” Amelia Bones was frowning slightly as she gazed
at the screen.
“For some reason or other,” said the amused voice of Professor Quirrell, “it seems that the scion of Malfoy is able to cast surprisingly strong
magic for a ﬁrst-year student. Due to the purity of his blood, of course.
Certainly the good Lord Malfoy would not have openly ﬂouted the underage magic laws by arranging for his son to receive a wand before his
acceptance into Hogwarts.”
“I suggest you be careful in your implications, Quirrell,” Lucius Malfoy said coldly.
“Oh, I am,” Professor Quirrell said. “A Colloportus cannot be dis* 1278 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

pelled by Finite Incantatem; it requires an Alohomora of equal strength.
Until then, a glove so Charmed will resist lesser material forces, deﬂect
the Sleep Hex and the Stunning Hex. And as neither Mr. Potter nor Miss
Granger can cast a counterspell powerful enough, that Charm is invincible upon this battleﬁeld. It is not the original intent of the Charm, nor
the intent of whoever taught Mr. Malfoy an emergency spell for evading his enemies. But it would seem that Mr. Malfoy has been learning
creativity.”
Lucius Malfoy had straightened as the Defense Professor spoke; he
now sat erect upon his cushioned bench, his head held perceptibly higher
than before, and when he spoke it was with quiet pride. “He will be the
greatest Lord Malfoy that has yet lived.”
“Faint praise,” Augusta Longbottom said under her breath; Amelia
Bones chuckled, as did Mr. Davis for a tiny, fatal fraction of a second
before he stopped with a strangled gargle.
“I quite agree,” said Professor Quirrell, though it wasn’t clear to
whom he spoke. “Unfortunately for Mr. Malfoy, he is still new to the
art of creativity, and so he has committed a classic error of Ravenclaw.”
“And what might that be?” said Lucius Malfoy, his voice now turned
chill once more.
Professor Quirrell had leaned back in his seat, the pale blue eyes
brieﬂy unfocusing as one of the windows shifted its viewpoint within
the greater screen, zooming in to show the sweat now on Draco Malfoy’s forehead. “It is such a beautiful idea that Mr. Malfoy has quite
overlooked its pragmatic diﬃculties.”
“Would someone care to explain that?” said Lady Greengrass. “Not
all of us present are experts at such... aﬀairs.”
Amelia Bones spoke, the old witch’s voice somewhat dry. “It will
tempt them to try to catch hexes that they would be wiser to simply
dodge. The more so, if they have had little practice catching them. And
the casting of so many Charms will tire their strongest warrior.”
Professor Quirrell gave the dmle Director a half-nod of acknowledgment. “As you say, Madam Bones. Mr. Malfoy is new to the business
of having ideas, and so when he has one, he becomes proud of himself
for having it. He has not yet had enough ideas to unﬂinchingly discard
* 1279 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

those that are beautiful in some aspects and impractical in others; he has
not yet acquired conﬁdence in his own ability to think of better ideas as
he requires them. What we are seeing here is not Mr. Malfoy’s best idea,
I fear, but rather his only idea.”
Lord Malfoy simply turned to watch the screens again, as though the
Defense Professor had used up his right to exist.
“But—” said Lord Greengrass. “But what in Merlin’s name is Harry
Potter—”

**
*
Sixteen remaining soldiers of the Chaos Legion—or ﬁfteen plus Blaise
Zabini, rather—marched conﬁdently through the forest, their shoes
thudding over the still-dry ground. Their camouﬂage uniforms blended
into the forest even more than usual, all colors washed out by the tints
of an overcast day.
Sixteen Chaos Legionnaires, against twenty-eight Dragon Warriors
and twenty-eight Sunshine Soldiers.
The common consensus had been that, with odds that bad, it was
practically impossible for them to lose. After all, General Chaos was
bound to come up with something really spectacular, facing odds like
that.
There was something almost nightmarish about how everyone
seemed to now expect Harry to pull miracles out of his hat, on demand,
any time one was needed. It meant that if you couldn’t do the impossible, you were disappointing your friends and failing to live up to your
potential...
Harry hadn’t bothered complaining to Professor Quirrell about ‘too
much pressure’. Harry’s mental model of the Defense Professor had
predicted him looking severely annoyed, saying things along the lines of
You are perfectly capable of solving this problem, Mr. Potter; did you even
try? and then deducting several hundred Quirrell points.
From above, from where two broomsticks watched their march, the
high young voice of Tess Walsh cried “Friend!” and after another moment, “Gingersnap!”
* 1280 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

A handful of seconds later, the soldier who’d code-named herself Gingersnap returned bearing a double handful of acorns, sweating
slightly in the cool but humid air from the jog that had taken her to the
oak tree Neville had spotted. Gingersnap approached to where Shannon
was holding a uniform-shirt with the neck tied oﬀ, in lieu of anyone having to Transﬁgure a bag. When Gingersnap brought her hands forward
to try and dump her acorns into the holding-shirt, Chaotic Shannon,
giggling, jerked the shirt to the right, then to the left again as Gingersnap made another eﬀort to dump the acorns, until a sharp “Miss Friedman!” from Lieutenant Nott caused Shannon to sigh and hold the shirt
still. Gingersnap dumped her acorns into those accumulated, and then
headed out for more.
Somewhere in the background, Ellie Knight was singing her very
own version of the Chaos Legion’s marching song, and around half the
other soldiers were trying to step along with it despite not knowing the
tune in advance. Nearby, Nita Berdine, who had a high Transﬁguration
score, ﬁnished creating yet another pair of green sunglasses, and handed
them to Adam Beringer, who folded up the sunglasses before tucking
them into his uniform pocket. Other soldiers were already wearing their
own green sunglasses, despite the cloudy day.
You might guess that there was some sort of incredibly complicated
and fascinating explanation behind this, and you would be right.
Two days earlier Harry had been sitting amid his bookcases in the
comfy rocking-chair he’d obtained for his trunk’s cavern level, pondering silently in the quiet span between classes and dinnertime, thinking
about power.
For sixteen Chaotics to defeat twenty-eight Sunnies and twenty-eight
Dragons they would need a force ampliﬁer. There were limits to what
you could do with maneuver. There had to be a secret weapon and it
had to be invincible, or at least moderately unstoppable.
Muggle artifacts were now illegal in Hogwarts’s mock battles, banned
by Ministry edict. And the trouble with ﬁnding some other clever and
unusual spell was that an army twice your own size could brute-force
Finite almost anything you tried. The Sunshine Regiment might have
missed that tactic with the Transﬁgured chainmail, but nobody would
*

1281 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

miss it again now that Professor Quirrell had spelled it out. And Finite Incantatem was a brute-force counterspell which required at least
as much magic as the spell being canceled... which, if you were severely
outnumbered, made it a whole new order of military challenge. The
enemy could Finite anything you tried, and still have enough magic left
over for shields and volleys of Sleep Hexes.
Unless, somehow, you could invoke potencies beyond the ordinary
strength of ﬁrst-year Hogwarts students, something too powerful for the
enemy to Finite.
So Harry had asked Neville if he’d ever heard of any small, safe sacriﬁcial rituals—
And then, after the screaming and the shouting had subsided, after
Harry had stopped trying to argue about Unbreakable Vows and just
given up the whole thing as clearly impossible from a public relations
standpoint, Harry had realized that he hadn’t even needed to go there.
They taught you how to invoke potencies far beyond your own strength
in ordinary Hogwarts classes.
Sometimes, even though you were looking straight at something,
you didn’t realize what you were looking at until you happened to ask
exactly the right question.
Defense. Charms. Transﬁguration. Potions. History of Magic. Astronomy. Broomstick Flying. Herbology...
“Foe!” screamed the voice from above.

**
*
It was a good thing that Neville Longbottom hadn’t the tiniest idea that
his grandmother was watching; or he would’ve been more self-conscious
about screaming scary battlecries at the top of his lungs while casting
Luminos every three seconds as he rocketed through a dense forest of
trees, hot on the tail of Gregory Goyle.
(“But—” Augusta Longbottom said, her expression showing almost
as much astonishment as worry. “But Neville is afraid of heights!”)
* 1282 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

(“Not all fears last,” said Amelia Bones. The old witch was favoring
the great screen before them with a measuring gaze. “Or perhaps he has
found courage. It is much the same, in the end.”)
A glimmer of red—
Neville dodged, very nearly into a tree but he did dodge; and then
Neville somehow also managed to dodge almost all of the branches before
they smacked him in the face.
Now Mr. Goyle’s broomstick was pulling further and further away—
even though the two of them were riding exactly the same broomstick
and Mr. Goyle weighed more, somehow Neville was still falling behind.
So Neville slowed down, pulled back, angled up out of the forest and
began to accelerate back toward where the Chaos Legion still marched.
Twenty seconds later—it hadn’t been a long chase, just an exciting
one—Neville was back among his fellow Chaotics, and dismounted his
broom to walk on the ground for a little bit.
“Neville—” said General Potter. Harry’s voice was a little distant, as
he walked carefully and steadily through the forest, his wand still applied
to the almost-ﬁnished Form of the object he was slowly Transﬁguring.
Beside him, Blaise Zabini, working a smaller version of the same Transﬁguration, looked like a shambling Inferi as he stumbled forward. “I told
you—Neville—you don’t have to—”
“Yes, I do,” said Neville. He looked down at where his ﬁngers
grasped the broomstick, and saw that not just his hands, but his whole
arms were shaking. But unless anyone else in Chaos had been practicing
dueling for an hour a day with Mr. Diggory, and then practicing their
aim in private for another hour afterward, Neville was probably the best
shot from a broomstick even after taking into account that he wasn’t a
very good ﬂyer.
“Good show, Neville,” Theodore said from where he was walking
ahead of them all, leading the Chaos Legion forward through the forest
while wearing only his undershirt.
(Augusta Longbottom and Charles Nott exchanged brief astonished
glances and then wrenched their gazes away from one another as though
stung.)
Neville took a few deep breaths, trying to steady his hands, trying to
* 1283 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

think; Harry might not be good for deep strategic thinking while he was
in the middle of an extended Transﬁguration. “Lieutenant Nott, do you
have any idea why Dragon Army just did that? They lost a broom—” The
Dragons had started the combat with a feint to provide a distraction for
Mr. Goyle’s approach through the forest; Neville hadn’t realized there
were two brooms attacking until almost too late. But the Chaos Legion
had gotten the other pilot. That was why broomsticks usually didn’t
attack before armies met, it meant a whole army would concentrate ﬁre
on the broomstick. “And the Dragons didn’t even get anyone, did they?”
“Nope!” Tracey Davis said proudly. She too was now marching by
General Potter’s side, her wand gripped low and watchful as her eyes
scanned the surrounding forest. “I threw up a Prismatic Sphere like a
split second before Mr. Goyle’s hex got Zabini, and the way Mr. Goyle
had his other arm stretched out I think he planned to knock down
the General, too.” The Slytherin witch smiled with vicious conﬁdence.
“Mr. Goyle tried a Breaking Drill Hex, but learned to his dismay that his
weak magic was no match for my newfound dark powers, hahahaha!”
Some Chaotics laughed with her, but a queasy sensation was starting in Neville’s stomach as he realized how close the Chaos Legion had
come to complete disaster. If Mr. Goyle had managed to disrupt both
Transﬁgurations—

**
*
“Report!” snapped the Dragon General, doing his best to conceal the
fatigue he felt after casting seventeen Locking Charms, with more yet to
come.
Beads of sweat now dotted Gregory’s forehead. “The enemy got Dylan Vaughan,” Gregory said formally. “Harry Potter and Blaise Zabini
were each Transﬁguring something dark-grey and roundish, I don’t think
it was ﬁnished but it looked like it would be big and hollow, sort of
cauldron-shaped. Zabini’s was smaller than Potter’s. I couldn’t get either of them or disrupt their Transﬁgurations, Tracey Davis blocked
me. Neville Longbottom is on a broomstick and he’s still a terrible ﬂyer
but his aim is really good.”
* 1284 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

Draco listened, frowning, and then he glanced at Padma and Dean
Thomas, who both shook their own heads, indicating that they also
couldn’t think of what might be big and grey and shaped like a cauldron.
“Anything else?” said Draco. If that was it, they’d lost a broom for
nothing—
“The only other weird thing I saw,” Gregory said, sounding puzzled,
“was that some Chaotics were wearing... sort of like goggles?”
Draco thought about this, not noticing that he’d stopped marching
or that all of Dragon Army had automatically stopped with him.
“Was there anything special about the goggles?” Draco said.
“Um...” Gregory said. “They were... greenish, maybe?”
“Okay,” said Draco. Again without thinking, he began walking once
more and his Dragons followed. “Here’s our new strategy. We’re only
going to send eleven Dragons against the Chaos Legion, not fourteen.
That should be enough to beat them, now that we can neutralize their
special advantage.” It was a gamble, but you had to take gambles sometimes, if you wanted to come in ﬁrst in a three-way battle.
“You ﬁgured out Chaos’s plan, General Malfoy?” said Mr. Thomas
with considerable surprise.
“What are they doing?” said Padma.
“I haven’t the faintest idea,” said Draco, with a smirk of the most
reﬁned smugness. “We’ll just do the obvious thing.”

**
*
Harry, having now ﬁnished his cauldron, was carefully scooping acorns
into the container while the scouts searched for a nearby source of water
that could be used as a liquid base. They’d come across frequent sinkholes and miniature creeks in the forest before, so it ought not to take
long. Another scout had brought a straight stick that would serve as a
stirrer, so Harry didn’t have to Transﬁgure one.
Sometimes, even though you were looking straight at something,
you didn’t realize what you were looking at until you happened to ask
exactly the right question...
* 1285 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

How can I invoke magical powers that ought to be beyond the reach of
ﬁrst-year students?
There was a cautionary tale the Potions Master had told them (with
much sneers and laughter to make the stupidity seem low-status instead
of daring and romantic) about a second-year witch in Beauxbatons who’d
stolen some extremely restricted and expensive ingredients, and tried to
brew Polyjuice so she could borrow the form of another girl for purposes
better left unmentioned. Only she’d managed to contaminate the potion
with cat hairs, and then instead of seeking a healer immediately, the witch
had hidden herself in a bathroom, hoping the eﬀects would just wear oﬀ;
and when she’d ﬁnally been found, it had been too late to reverse the
transformation completely, condemning her to a life of despair as a sort
of cat-girl hybrid.
Harry hadn’t realized what that meant until the instant of thinking the right question—but what that implied was that a young wizard
or witch could do things with Potions-Making that they couldn’t even
come close to doing with Charms. Polyjuice was one of the most potent
potions known... but what made Polyjuice a N.E.W.T.-level potion, apparently, wasn’t the required age before you had enough magical power;
it was how diﬃcult the potion was to brew precisely and what happened
to you if you screwed up.
Nobody in any army had tried brewing any potions up until then.
But Professor Quirrell would let you get away with nearly anything, if it
was something you could have done in a real war. Cheating is technique,
the Defense Professor had once lectured them. Or rather, cheating is what
the losers call technique, and will be worth extra Quirrell points when executed successfully. In principle, there was nothing unrealistic about Transﬁguring a couple of cauldrons and brewing potions out of whatever came
to hand, if you had enough time before the armies met.
So Harry had retrieved his copy of Magical Drafts and Potions, and
begun looking for a safe but useful potion he could brew in the minutes
before the battle started—a potion which would win the battle too fast
for counterspells, or produce spell eﬀects too strong for ﬁrst-years to
Finite.
Sometimes, even though you were looking straight at something,
* 1286 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

you didn’t realize what you were looking at until you happened to ask
exactly the right question...
What potion can I brew using only components gathered from an ordinary forest?
Every recipe in Magical Drafts and Potions used at least one ingredient
from a magical plant or animal. Which was unfortunate, because all the
magical plants and animals were in the Forbidden Forest, not the safer
and lesser woods where battles were held.
Someone else might have given up at that point.
Harry had turned the pages from one recipe to another, skimming
faster and faster in dawning realization, conﬁrming what he had already
read and was now seeing for the ﬁrst time.
Every single Potions recipe seemed to demand at least one magical
ingredient, but why should that be true?
Charms required no material components at all; you just said the
words and waved your wand. Harry had been thinking about PotionsMaking as essentially analogous: Instead of your spoken syllables triggering a spell eﬀect for no comprehensible reason, you collected a batch
of disgusting ingredients and stirred four times clockwise, and that arbitrarily triggered a spell eﬀect.
In which case, given that most potions used ordinary components
like porcupine quills or stewed slugs, you’d expect to see some potions
using only ordinary components.
But instead every single recipe in Magical Drafts and Potions demanded at least one component from a magical plant or animal—an ingredient like silk from an Acromantula or petals from a Venus Fire Trap.
Sometimes, even though you were looking straight at something,
you didn’t realize what you were looking at until you happened to ask
exactly the right question...
If making a potion is like casting a Charm, why don’t I fall over from
exhaustion after brewing a draught as powerful as boil-curing?
The Friday before last, Harry’s double Potions class had brewed potion of boil-curing... although even the most trivial healing Charms, if
you tried to cast them with wand and incantation, were at least fourthyear spells. And afterward, they’d all felt the way they usually felt after
* 1287 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Potions class, namely, not magically exhausted to any discernible degree.
Harry had shut his copy of Magical Drafts and Potions with a snap,
and rushed down to the Ravenclaw common room. Harry had found a
seventh-year Ravenclaw doing his N.E.W.T. potions homework and paid
the older boy a Sickle to borrow Moste Potente Potions for ﬁve minutes;
because Harry hadn’t wanted to run all the way to the library to ﬁnd
conﬁrmation.
After skimming through ﬁve recipes in the seventh-year book, Harry
had read the sixth recipe, for a potion of ﬁre breathing, which required
Ashwinder eggs... and the book warned that the resulting ﬁre could be
no hotter than the magical ﬁre which had spawned the Ashwinder which
had laid the eggs.
Harry had shouted “Eureka!” right in the middle of the Ravenclaw
common room, and been severely rebuked by a nearby prefect, who’d
thought Mr. Potter was trying to cast a spell. Nobody in the wizarding
world knew or cared about some ancient Muggle named Archimedes,
nor the ur-physicist’s realization that the water displaced from a bathtub
would equal the volume of the object entering the bathtub...
Conservation laws. They’d been the critical insight in more Muggle discoveries than Harry could easily count. In Muggle technology
you couldn’t raise a feather one meter oﬀ the ground without the power
coming from somewhere. If you looked at molten lava spilling from a
volcano and asked where the heat came from, a physicist would tell you
about radioactive heavy metals in the center of the Earth’s molten core.
If you asked where the energy to power the radioactivity came from,
the physicist would point to an era before the Earth had formed, and a
primordial supernova in the early days of the galaxy which had baked
atomic nuclei heavier than the natural limit, the supernova compressing protons and neutrons into a tight unstable package that yielded back
some of the supernova’s energy when it split. A light bulb was fueled
by electricity, fueled by a nuclear power plant, fueled by a supernova...
You could play the game all the way back to the Big Bang.
Magic did not appear to work like this, to put it mildly. Magic’s attitude toward laws like Conservation of Energy was somewhere between
a giant extended middle ﬁnger, and a shrug of total indiﬀerence. Agua* 1288 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

menti created water out of nothingness, so far as anyone knew; there
was no known lake whose water level went down each time. That was
a simple ﬁfth-year spell, not considered impressive by wizards, because
creating a mere glass of water didn’t seem amazing to them. They didn’t
have the wacky notion that mass ought to be conserved, or that creating a
gram of mass was somehow equivalent to creating 90,000,000,000,000
joules of energy. There was an upper-year spell Harry had run across
whose literal incantation was ‘Arresto Momentum!’ and when Harry had
asked if the momentum went anywhere else he’d just gotten a puzzled
look. So Harry had kept a desperate eye out for some kind of conservation principle in magic, anywhere...
...and the whole time it had been right in front of him in every Potions class. Potions-Making didn’t create magic, it preserved magic, that
was why every potion needed at least one magical ingredient. And by
following instructions like ‘stir four times counterclockwise and once
clockwise’—Harry had hypothesized—you were doing something like
casting a small spell that reshaped the magic in the ingredients. (And
unbound the physical form so that ingredients like porcupine quills dissolved smoothly into a drinkable liquid; Harry strongly suspected that
a Muggle following exactly the same recipe would end up with nothing
but a spiny mess.) That was what Potions-Making really was, the art
of transforming existing magical essences. So you were a little tired after Potions class, but not much, because you weren’t empowering the
potions yourself, you were just reshaping magic that was already there.
And that was why a second-year witch could brew Polyjuice, or at least
get close.
Harry had kept scanning through Moste Potente Potions, looking for
something that might disprove his shiny new theory. After ﬁve minutes
he’d ﬂipped the older boy another Sickle, over his protests, and kept
going.
The potion of giant strength required a Re’em to trample the mashed
Dugbogs you stirred into the potion. It was odd, Harry had realized
after a moment, because crushed Dugbogs weren’t strong themselves,
they were just... very, very crushed after the Re’em got through with
them.
* 1289 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Another recipe said to ‘touch with forged bronze’, i.e., grasp a Knut
in pliers so you could skim the potion’s surface; and if you dropped
the Knut all the way in, the book warned, the potion would instantly
superheat and boil over the cauldron.
Harry had stared at the recipes and their warnings, forming a second
and stranger hypothesis. Of course it wouldn’t be as simple as PotionsMaking using magical potentials imbued in the ingredients, like Muggle
cars fueled by the combustion potential of gasoline. Magic would never
be as sensible as that...
And then Harry had gone to Professor Flitwick—since he didn’t
want to approach Professor Snape outside of class—and Harry had told
Professor Flitwick that he wanted to invent a new potion, and he knew
what the ingredients ought to be and what the potion should do, but he
didn’t know how to deduce the required stirring pattern—
After Professor Flitwick had stopped screaming in horror and running in little circles, and Professor McGonagall had been called into the
ensuing ﬁerce interrogation to promise Harry that in this case it was
both acceptable and important for him to reveal his underlying theory,
it had developed that Harry had not made an original magical discovery, but rediscovered a law so ancient that nobody knew who had ﬁrst
formulated it:
A potion spends that which is invested in the creation of its ingredients.
The heat of goblin forges that had cast the bronze Knut, the Re’em’s
strength that had crushed the Dugbogs, the magical ﬁre that had spawned
the Ashwinder: all these potencies could be recalled, unlocked, and restructured by the spell-like process of stirring the ingredients in exact
patterns.
(From a Muggle standpoint it was just odd, a deranged version of
thermodynamics invented by someone who thought life ought to be
fair. From a Muggle standpoint, the heat expended in forging the Knut
hadn’t gone into the bronze, the heat had left and dissipated into the environment, becoming permanently less available. Energy was conserved,
could be neither created nor destroyed; entropy always increased. But
wizards didn’t think that way: from their perspective, if you’d put some
amount of work into making a Knut, it stood to reason that you could
* 1290 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

get exactly the same work back out. Harry had tried to explain why
this sounded a bit odd if you’d been raised by Muggles, and Professor
McGonagall had asked bemusedly why the Muggle perspective was any
better than the wizarding one.)
The fundamental principle of Potions-Making had no name and no
standard phrasing, since then you might be tempted to write it down.
And someone who wasn’t wise enough to ﬁgure out the principle
themselves might read it.
And they would start having all sorts of bright ideas for inventing
new Potions.
And then they would be turned into catgirls.
It had been made very clear to Harry that he wasn’t going to be sharing this particular discovery with Neville, or Hermione either after the
next armies’ battle. Harry had tried to say something about Hermione
seeming really oﬀ lately and this being just the sort of thing that might
cheer her up. Professor McGonagall had said ﬂatly that he wasn’t even
to think it, and Professor Flitwick had raised his little hands and made a
gesture as of snapping a wand in half.
Although the two Professors had been kind enough to suggest that if
Mr. Potter thought he knew what the potion’s ingredients should be, he
might be able to ﬁnd an already-existing recipe that did the same thing;
and Professor Flitwick had mentioned several volumes in the Hogwarts
library that might be useful...

**
*
The vast parchment-like screen now showed only an aerial view of the
forest, from which you could barely make out the camouﬂaged forms
of three armies, split up into two groups each, converging to ﬁght their
three-way battle.
The benches of the Quidditch stadium were now rapidly ﬁlling up
with the more easily bored sort of spectator who only wanted to be
there for the ﬁnal battle and skip out on all the boring points along the
way. (If there was anything wrong with Professor Quirrell’s battles, it
*

1291 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

was widely agreed, it was that his spectacles didn’t last nearly as long as
Quidditch matches, once they actually started. To this Professor Quirrell had replied only, Such is real life, and that had been that.)
Within the huge window—it was all one window now, observing
from a great height—the vague collections of tiny camouﬂaged forms
grew closer.
Closer.
Almost touching—

**
*
The vast white parchment window showed the ﬁrst touch of battle between Sunshine and Chaos, a screaming mass of running children with
smiley-faces upon their breasts, charging forward with Contego shields
held high and others shouting “Somnium!”—
Until one of their number shrieked “Prismatis!” in a terriﬁed voice
and the entire charge came to a sudden halt before the sparkling wall of
force that had appeared in front of them.
Tracey Davis had walked out from behind the trees.
“That’s right,” said Tracey, her voice low and grim as she leveled her
wand on the barrier. “You should fear me. For I am Tracey Davis, the
Darke Lady! That’s Darke Lady spelled D-A-R-K-E, with an E!”
(Amelia Bones, Director of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement, was sending an inquiring look at Mr. and Mrs. Davis, both of
whom looked like they would have dearly preferred to die on the spot.)
Behind the Prismatic Barrier, there was some kind of hushed argument taking place among the Sunshine Soldiers, one of whom in particular seemed to be getting scolded by several of the others.
Then, a moment later, Tracey ﬂinched.
Susan Bones had come to the front of the Sunshine contingent.
(“Goodness,” said Augusta Longbottom. “What do you suppose
your grand-niece has been learning at Hogwarts?”)
(“I don’t know,” Amelia Bones said calmly, “but I shall owl her a
Chocolate Frog and instructions to learn more of it.”)
The Prismatic Barrier vanished.
* 1292 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

The Sunshine Soldiers resumed their charge forward.
Tracey yelled, her voice high with strain, “Inﬂammare!” and the Sunshine charge came to another sudden halt as a line of ﬁre blazed up between them in the half-dry grass, extending to follow the path of Tracey’s
wand as she pointed it; an instant later Susan Bones cried “Finite Incantatem!” and the ﬂames dimmed, brightened, dimmed in the contest of
their wills, other soldiers raising their wards to aim at Tracey; and that
was when Neville Longbottom plunged shrieking out of the sky.

**
*
One of the Dragon Warriors, Raymond Arnold, made a hand-sign,
pointing forward and oblique left; and there was a sudden hushed hiss of
whispers among the Dragon Army contingent as they all quietly reoriented themselves in the direction of the enemy. The Sunnies knew they
were there, of course both armies knew; but somehow, in this moment,
they had all become instinctively quiet.
The Dragons crept forward further, and then further, the dull camouﬂaged forms of the Sunnies beginning to appear among the distant
trees, and still nobody spoke, nobody bellowed the call to charge.
Draco was now at the forefront of his soldiers, Vincent behind him
and Padma only a shade further back; if the three of them could take the
shock of Sunshine’s best, the rest of Dragon Army might stand a chance.
Then Draco saw one Sunnie staring at him from the distance, in the
vanguard of her own army; staring at him with a look of fury—
Across the forest battleground, their eyes met.
Draco had only a fraction of a second to wonder, in the back of his
mind, what Hermione Granger was so angry about, before the shout
went up from both their armies; and they were all running forward to
the charge, himself and Granger on a direct collision course for each
other.

**
*
* 1293 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

The other Chaotics had appeared now from among the trees, some had
dropped out of trees, and the battle was in full force now, everyone ﬁring
in every direction at anything that looked like an enemy. Plus a number
of Sunnies crying “Luminos!” at Neville Longbottom as the Chaos Hufﬂepuﬀ twisted and rocketed up through the air on courses that could
only be described as, indeed, “chaotic”—
And it happened, the way it happened only one time out of twenty
in mock aerial combat, that Neville Longbottom’s broomstick glowed
bright red beneath his clenched hands.
It should’ve meant that Longbottom was out of the game.
Then, in the Hogwarts stands, among the watching crowds of students, a scream went up—
Combat realism. It was Professor Quirrell’s one master rule. You
could get away with anything if it was realistic, and in real life, a soldier
didn’t just vanish when their broomstick got hit by a curse.
Neville was falling toward the ground and screaming “Chaotic landing!” and the Chaotics were wrenching their attention away from ﬁghts
to cast the Hover Charm (and run at the same time so they wouldn’t be
sitting ducks), almost everyone else stopping to gape—
And Neville Longbottom slammed into the leaf-laden forest ground,
landing on one knee, one foot, and both hands, as though he were kneeling down to be knighted.
Everything stopped. Even Tracey and Susan paused in their duel.
In the stadium, all crowd noises vanished.
There was a universal silence composed of astonishment, concern,
and sheer dumbstruck gaping awe, as everyone waited to see what would
happen next.
And then Neville Longbottom slowly rose to his feet, and leveled his
wand, still in hand, at the Sunshine Soldiers.
Though nobody on the battleﬁeld heard it, a large segment of the
stadium audience had begun chanting, in steadily rising notes each time
the word was uttered, “Doom Doom Doom Doom Doom”, because you
just couldn’t see that and not think it required musical accompaniment.
“The crowd is cheering your grandson,” said Amelia Bones. The old
witch was favoring the screen with a measuring look.
* 1294 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

“So they are,” said Augusta Longbottom. “Some, if I hear correctly,
are cheering, Our blood for Neville! Our souls for Neville!”
“Quite,” said Amelia, taking a sip from a teacup which had not been
there moments earlier. “It shows the lad has leadership potential.”
“These cheers,” continued Augusta, her voice taking on an even more
stunned quality, “seem to be coming from the Huﬄepuﬀ benches.”
“It is the House of the loyal, my dear,” said Amelia.
“Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore! What in Merlin’s name
has been happening in this school?”
Lucius Malfoy was watching the screens with an ironic smile, his ﬁngers tapping at his armrest in no discernible pattern. “I do not know
what is more frightening, the thought that he has some hidden plan behind all this, or the thought that he does not.”
“Look!” cried the Lord of Greengrass. The dapper young man had
risen half out of his chair, pointing his ﬁnger at the screen. “There she
goes!”

**
*
“We’ll both take him at once,” Daphne whispered. She knew that a few
fear-ﬁlled minutes of real combat experience, a handful of times each
week, might not be enough to match Neville’s regular dueling practice
with Harry and Cedric Diggory over the same period. “He’s too much
for one of us, but both of us together— I’ll use my Charm, you just try
to stun him—”
Hannah, beside her, nodded, and then they both screamed at the
top of their lungs and charged forward, the Hover Charms of two supporting Sunshine Soldiers moving them faster and making them light on
their feet, Daphne already crying “Tonare!” even as Hannah kept a huge
Contego shield moving in front of them, and with a brief extra lift they
leapt over the heads of the front screen of soldiers and landed in front of
Neville with their hair billowing high around them—
(Photographs were strictly prohibited at all Hogwarts games, but
somehow this moment still ended up on the front page of the next day’s
Quibbler.)
* 1295 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

—and in the same instant, because ﬁghting older bullies had burned
away the slightest traces of hesitation, Hannah ﬁred her ﬁrst Sleep Hex at
Neville (she’d started the incantation while she was still in the air) even
as Daphne, concentrating more on speed than on force, slashed down
with her Ancient Blade at where she thought Neville’s thighs would be
after he dodged—
But Neville leapt up, not sideways, leapt up higher than he should’ve
been able to go, so that her glowing sword cut only the air beneath
his feet. Somehow Daphne realized what it meant, that Neville still
had other Chaotics Hovering him, in time for her to raise her Blade
up over her head, but Neville fell too fast and when his Blade smashed
into hers it was like being hit by a Bludger. It knocked Daphne oﬀ her
feet and sent her sprawling backward onto the grass, hitting the ground
hard on her back. It might have been all over for her, then, if Neville
hadn’t landed too hard himself and gone to his knees with a pained gasp.
And then before Neville could bring his glowing Blade down, Hannah
shouted “Somnium!” and Neville lurched frantically backward—though
of course no spell had actually come from Hannah’s wand, the Hufﬂepuﬀ girl couldn’t really have ﬁred again that fast—which gave Daphne
a second to scramble to her feet and get both hands around her wand
again—

**
*

“Dear Merlin,” said Lady Greengrass. Her voice seemed unsteady, the
aristocratic poise well-punctured. “My daughter is ﬁghting with the
Charm of the Most Ancient Blade, in her ﬁrst year. I never knew—
she possessed such extraordinary talent—”
“Excellent blood,” Charles Nott said approvingly, causing Augusta
to snort.
“My good Lady,” said Professor Quirrell, sounding grave. “Do not
wrong your daughter so. That is not mere talent which you see.” His
* 1296 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

voice grew a little dryer. “That is what happens when young wizards and witches put their competitive eﬀorts into a game which, unlike Quidditch or Exploding Snap, involves—to put it bluntly—actual
spellcasting.”

**
*
“Expelliarmus!” shouted Draco, trying not to let his voice crack as he
simultaneously dodged the blazing red stunbolt that Hermione Granger
had ﬁred at him, his muscles twisting with the need to dodge in the
wrong direction—she’d pointed to his left, and then with a mysterious
twitch ﬁred right—
Hermione dodged the fast-moving dueling hex, and cried with
hardly another moment’s pause, “Steleus!”, a wide-angle Hex that Draco
couldn’t avoid, but he managed to point his wand at his own face and
cry “Quiescus!” before the sudden urge to inhale could devolve into a
sneezing ﬁt that would’ve ended the battle.
Draco Malfoy was already half-exhausted from all the Locking
Charms and Transﬁgurations earlier, but his confusion was beginning
to give way to a sense of his own blood boiling, he didn’t know why
Granger was attacking him so angrily all of a sudden, but if she wanted a
ﬁght he’d give her one—
(The Dragons and Sunnies weren’t stopping to watch the duel of their
Generals, the Dragons were too disciplined to stop and watch and that
meant the Sunnies had to go on ﬁghting too; but the gaping audience in
the Hogwarts Quidditch stands were being distracted even from Neville
and Daphne’s spectacle, shifting their eyes to the duel of two Generals as
Malfoy and Granger ﬁred hex after hex and jinx after jinx at each other,
casting more rapidly than any other student in their year could have
managed, the Dragon General’s trained dueling dance matched by the
Sunshine General’s frantic energy, the combat between them beginning
to resemble an adult duel as the two most magically powerful ﬁrst-years
resorted to spells more exotic than the usual Sleep Hex.)
—although, Draco was beginning to realize, when he and Harry and
Professor Quirrell had dismissed Miss Granger as having as much intent
* 1297 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

to kill as a bowl of wet grapes, they’d never seen her angry.

**
*
Daphne lashed out with her Ancient Blade, again not trying to hit hard
but just moving the Blade as fast as possible, at the same time Hannah
cried “Somnium!” and Neville leapt back again, but it had been another
bluﬀ and Hannah was moving in to ﬁre a real spell almost point-blank—
—and Neville Longbottom did exactly what—he would explain afterward—Cedric Diggory had trained him to do if he was ﬁghting Bellatrix
Black, which was to spin around and kick Hannah really hard in the pit
of her stomach.
The Huﬄepuﬀ girl made a sad little sound, a gasping cry of pain, as
she was knocked oﬀ her feet by the hard shoe sinking into her abdomen
with the force of Neville’s whole body behind it.
For an instant the battleﬁeld stood still, everything halted except
Hannah’s falling form.
Then Neville’s face turned to absolute dismay and he lowered his
wand, the Chaotic Lieutenant starting instinctively toward his Housemate as he reached for her with his other hand—
Even as Hannah turned her fall into a roll and came out with her
wand raised and shot him.
A fractional second later, Daphne, who hadn’t hesitated either, sank
her Most Ancient Blade squarely into Neville’s back, causing the Chaotic
Lieutenant’s muscles to jerk convulsively with the stunning magic discharging into him even as Hannah’s Sleep Hex took eﬀect, and then the
last scion of Longbottom was sprawled still on the ground with a look
of total surprise frozen to his face.

**
*
“Today Mr. Longbottom has learned a valuable lesson about his feelings
of pity and remorse,” said Professor Quirrell.
* 1298 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

“And chivalry,” said Amelia, sipping her tea again.

**
*
“Are you all right?” whispered Daphne, as she stood protectively over
where Hannah lay on the ground clutching her stomach. The girl didn’t
give anything back in reply except more retching sounds that sounded
like Hannah was trying not to throw up while trying not to cry.
Somehow, even though it might not have been good tactics—it
would’ve been better if Hannah had been hexed outright, than for other
soldiers to be tied up protecting her—a number of Sunnies seemed to be
standing in front of Hannah with their wands clutched tightly, staring
angrily at the Chaotics. Someone had thrown up a Prismatic barrier
between the two groups, Daphne couldn’t see who.
And for some reason the Chaotics didn’t seem to be pressing the attack. Even Tracey had completely dropped the grim look on her face and
was shifting her weight nervously from one foot to another, as though
she was having trouble remembering which side she was on—
“Hold!” shouted a voice. “Hold battle!”
There wasn’t much battle going on anyway, but it held.
General Potter, looking every inch the Boy-Who-Lived, strode out
from the trees with something large and camouﬂage-cloth-covered held
under one arm.
“Is Miss Abbott breathing all right?” General Potter yelled.
Daphne didn’t look back. She didn’t trust that this wasn’t a trap—
it was absolutely certain that if the Chaotics took the opportunity to
attack, Professor Quirrell would not only rule it legal but also award
them extra points afterward. But Daphne could hear the answer well
enough with her ears, it wasn’t like Hannah was trying to breathe quietly,
and so she said, “Sort of.”
“She should get out of here and to someone who can use healing
Charms,” Harry said. “Just in case that broke something.”
From behind Daphne, a small gasping voice said, “I—can—still—
ﬁght—”
* 1299 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

“Miss Abbott, don’t—” Harry said, just as there was the sound from
behind Daphne of someone collapsing back to the grass after trying and
failing to get to her feet. Everyone winced, but Daphne didn’t turn her
back on Harry.
“Why haven’t the teachers stopped the battle?” said Susan, her voice
angry.
“I expect it’s because Miss Abbott is in no danger of permanent damage and Professor Quirrell thinks we’re learning valuable lessons,” Harry
said in a hard voice. “Look, Miss Abbott, if you go, Tracey will also retire from the battle. You already outnumber us, so that’s a very good
deal for your side. Please take it.”
“Hannah, just go!” said Daphne. “I mean, just say you’re out!”
When Daphne glanced back she saw that Hannah was shaking her
head, still curled up in a ball on the grass.
“Oh, screw this,” said Harry. “Chaotics! The faster we stun them, the
faster she’s out of here! We’re going to do this very quickly, even if we take
casualties! End truce! Tunafish!”
Daphne’s political hindbrain had only an instant to admire how
Harry’s few words had just made the Chaotics the good guys, and then
in almost perfect unison, the Chaotics were plunging their hands into
the pockets of their uniforms and drawing out green sunglasses in an
unfamiliar style. Not like anything you would wear to the beach, more
like goggles for advanced Potions—
Then Daphne realized what was about to happen and snapped up
her other hand to shield her eyes, just as Harry ripped the cloth oﬀ the
cauldron.
The ﬂuid that spilled forth as Harry Potter threw the cauldron’s contents into the air was too bright to be seen, too brilliant to be imagined,
incandescent like the Sun magniﬁed a dozen times—
(which was exactly what it was)
(the sunlight which had been invested to create the acorns, the bright
energy that had fueled a tree rising up from the bare dirt)
(blazing a searing purple, the color of the mixed blue and red wavelengths that chlorophyll absorbed)
(with almost none of the green wavelengths that chlorophyll reﬂected
* 1300 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

to create the green color of leaves)
(which was the color of the Chaos Legion’s sunglasses, made to pass
through green wavelengths, blocking red and blue, reducing even the
most incandescent purple glare to something bearable)
—the violet light blazed on and on, Daphne tried dropping her arm
from her eyes but found that she couldn’t look directly at anything, even
the secondhand purple glare was so bright she had to squint; and she
had only time to cry one Finite Incantatem, which didn’t work, before a
Sleep Hex took her.
What was left of the battle didn’t take very long after that.

**
*
“Now!” bellowed Blaise Zabini, formerly of Sunshine, now commanding
a detachment of Chaos Legionnaires. “I mean, Tunafish!” The Slytherin
boy’s hand grasped the cloth shielding the cauldron from the triggering
touch of daylight, already beginning to move it aside.
“Now!” bellowed Dean Thomas, formerly of Chaos, commanding a
consignment of Dragon Warriors. “Do whatever they do!”
The Chaotics of Zabini’s detachment plunged their hands into their
uniform pockets, and came forth bearing green sunglasses—
—an action almost perfectly mirrored by Dean and the Dragon Warriors, who drew forth green-colored Potions goggles, and quickly drew
the straps over their own heads, even as the Chaotics put on their sunglasses and the violet incandescence blasted forth.
(As General Malfoy had explained, if Mr. Goyle reported that the
Chaos Legion was wearing green-colored Potions goggles, you didn’t
have to know why to Transﬁgure some copies.)
“That’s cheating!” shrieked Blaise Zabini.
“That’s technique!” Dean yelled back. “Dragons, charge!”
(“Pardon me,” the Lady Greengrass said. “Could you stop laughing
like that, Mr. Quirrell? It’s unnerving.”)
*

1301 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

“Finite their goggles!” shouted Blaise Zabini, as the two armies ran
headlong toward each other through omnipresent eye-searing purple
glare. “We can still win!”
“You heard him!” bellowed Dean. “Get their glasses!”
Blaise Zabini’s reply to this wasn’t anything articulate.
That battle went on a lot longer.

**
*
“Stupefy!” shrieked the Sunshine General.
Draco didn’t dodge, he didn’t counter, he didn’t have enough energy
left for either, all he could do was whip his left hand into position and
hope—
The red stunbolt dissipated again on Draco’s Colloportused glove,
which he’d Transﬁgured and spell-locked to his hand the same as the
rest of Dragon Army. It was all that was saving him now, that shield.
It should have been a time to counterattack, but Draco could only
catch his breath, as the two of them danced backward and forward beneath the trees in the never-ending movements of their duel. Across from
him, General Granger was panting hard, the young girl’s face glistening
with sweat like dew, her chestnut hair wetted into brown plaits. Her
camouﬂage uniform was stained with damp spots, her shoulders visibly
trembling with exhaustion, but her wand was still steel-steady where it
stayed level on Draco through all their motion. Her eyes glaring, her
cheeks ﬂushed with rage.
So, little girl, why’re you pretending to ﬁght like a grownup today?
The taunt came to mind, but he didn’t really think he needed Granger any angrier; so instead Draco just said—though he could hear his
own voice cracking—“Any reason you’re feeling mad at me, Granger?”
The girl was gasping for breath herself, her own voice wobbling as
she spoke. “I know what you’re up to,” said Hermione Granger, her
voice rising. “I know what you and Snape are up to, Malfoy, and I know
who’s behind it!”
“Huh?” Draco said without even thinking about it.
* 1302 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

That only seemed to increase Granger’s fury, and her ﬁngers
whitened on the wand she held leveled on him.
And then Draco got it, and it boiled his own blood in his veins. Even
she thought he was secretly plotting against her—
“You too?” Draco yelled. “I helped you, you bucktoothed bint! You,
you, you,”— stuttering past all the Dark curses that came to mind until
he found something he could actually cast at her—“Densaugeo!”
But Granger ﬂashed and whirled around the Tooth-Lengthening
Hex, and then her own wand came around and leveled at almost pointblank range, even as Draco brought up his left hand like a shield, placing
the magic-locked glove between himself and whatever she was about to
ﬁre, and the Sunshine General’s own voice rose to a shriek audible across
the whole battleground—
“ALOHOMORA!”
Time should have paused.
But it didn’t.
Instead the padlocked glove on Draco’s hand ﬂashed brieﬂy grey, and
then the padlock clicked and fell oﬀ.
Just like that.
Just like that.
The screens showed it all very clearly, to the entire watching Hogwarts stadium.
And the bone-dead-silent hush that fell over every bench in every
bleacher said that everyone understood quite clearly what it meant, that
the scion of House Malfoy had just had his magic overcome by a Muggleborn.
Hermione Granger didn’t pause in her ﬁght, gave no sign that she
even knew what she’d done; instead her foot snapped out in a Mugglestyle kick that knocked Draco’s wand cleanly out of his hand, his
shocked mind and body moving just a little too slowly. Draco dove
after his wand, scrabbling frantically on the ground, but from behind
him a girl’s cracking voice said “Somnium!” and Draco Malfoy fell and
didn’t rise again.
There was another moment of frozen silence. The Sunshine General
was wobbling on her feet, looking like she might faint.
* 1303 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Then the Dragon Warriors screamed at the top of their lungs and
charged forward to avenge their fallen commander.

**
*
Mr. and Mrs. Davis were shaking as they stood up from the comfortable chairs of the faculty Quidditch box; they couldn’t quite clutch each
other while walking, but they held hands tightly, pretending hard to
be invisible. If they’d been children young enough for accidental magic
they probably would’ve spontaneously Disillusioned themselves.
The elderly Charles Nott said nothing as he stood from his chair.
The scarred Lord Jugson said nothing, as he stood from his own chair.
Lucius Malfoy said nothing as he stood.
All three of them turned without pause and strode toward the stairwell of the elevated bleachers, moving in eerie unison like an Auror
trio—
“Lord Malfoy,” the Defense Professor said in mild tones. That
man was still seated in his own chair, looking upon his parchment-like
screens, arms limp at his side, as though for some reason he didn’t feel
like moving.
The white-haired man halted just before reaching the exit archway,
and the elderly man and the scarred man halted as well, ﬂanking him.
Lord Malfoy’s head turned, too slightly to be any form of acknowledgement, but in the Defense Professor’s direction.
“Your son performed exceptionally well today,” said Professor Quirrell. “I must confess that I underestimated him. And he has earned his
army’s loyalty, as you have witnessed.” Still very mild, the Defense Professor’s voice. “Speaking as your son’s teacher, it is my opinion that he
will not beneﬁt if you interfere in his—”
Lord Malfoy and his compatriots vanished down the stairs.
“A ﬁne try, Quirinus,” Dumbledore said quietly. The old wizard’s
face showed small lines of worry; he hadn’t risen from his own seat either, staring at the parchment screens as though they were still active.
“Do you think he will listen?”
* 1304 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

The Defense Professor’s shoulders twitched in a slight shrug, the
only movement they’d shown since the battle ended.
“Well,” said the Lady Greengrass, as she rose up and cracked her
knuckles, stretching, her husband silent beside her. “I must say, that
was quite... interesting...”
Amelia Bones had risen from her own cushioned seat without any
fuss. “Interesting indeed,” said Director Bones. “I do confess, I ﬁnd
myself disturbed by the skill with which those children were ﬁghting
one another.”
“The skill?” Lord Greengrass said. “Their spells didn’t seem all that
impressive to me. Except for Daphne’s, of course.”
The old witch did not move her eyes from where she was gazing at
the Defense Professor’s balding head. “The Stunning Hex is not a ﬁrstyear spell, Lord Greengrass, but that is not the skill I had in mind. They
supported each other with those simple spells, they reacted at speed to
surprises...” The Director of the dmle paused, as though searching for
words that a mere civilian could understand. “In the midst of battle,”
she said ﬁnally, “with spells ﬂying in every direction... those children
seemed quite at home.”
“Indeed, Director Bones,” said the Defense Professor. “Some arts are
best begun in youth.”
The old witch’s eyes narrowed. “You are readying them to become
a military force, Professor. To what end?”
“Now hold on!” interjected Lord Greengrass. “There’s plenty of
schools where they teach dueling in ﬁrst year!”
“Dueling?” said the Defense Professor. From behind it wasn’t visible
if the pale face was smiling. “That is nothing, Lord Greengrass, to what
my students have learned. They have learned not to hesitate in the face
of ambushes and greater foes. They have learned to adapt when combat
conditions change and change again. They have learned to protect their
allies, to protect more those who are more valuable, to abandon pieces
which cannot be rescued. They have learned that to survive they must
follow orders. Some have even learned a little creativity. Oh, no, Lord
Greengrass, these wizards will not hide in their manors and wait to be
protected, when the next threat comes. They will know that they know
* 1305 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

how to ﬁght.”
Augusta Longbottom loudly clapped her hands together three times.

**
*
We won.
It was the ﬁrst thing Draco heard when he woke up on the battleﬁeld,
Padma telling him how his soldiers had rallied after he fell. How, thanks
to the Dragon General’s foresight, Mr. Thomas had led his detachment
to victory over Chaos. How General Potter had defeated the portion
of the Sunshine Regiment that clashed with him. How Mr. Thomas’s
Dragon Warriors had rejoined the main body of soldiers bearing both
their own goggles and the sunglasses of the defeated Chaotics. How, only
moments later, General Potter’s remaining contingent had attacked both
other armies with a potion that emitted searing purple light. But Dragon
had held the numerical advantage over Sunshine and Chaos both, and
enough sunglasses for their warriors; and so Padma had managed to lead
her inherited army to victory.
From the light in Padma’s eyes and her arrogant smile that would
have done proud to a Malfoy, she was expecting congratulations. Draco
managed to grit out some form of praise from between his clenched
teeth, and couldn’t have said afterward what it was. The foreign-born
witch, it appeared, hadn’t any idea what’d happened, or what it meant.
I lost.
The Dragons trudged back to Hogwarts beneath gray skies, cold
droplets landing heavy on Draco’s skin, one by one. While he’d been
stunned, it had begun, the long-promised rain ﬁnally beginning to fall.
There was only one option left to Draco now. A forced move, as
Mr. MacNair, who’d taught Draco chess, would have termed it. Harry
Potter probably wouldn’t like it, if he really was in love with Granger the
way everyone said. But the forced move, as Mr. MacNair had deﬁned it,
was one you needed to make if you wanted the game to continue at all.
It kept on playing in Draco’s mind, over and over again, even as he
walked like an automaton through the massive portals of Hogwarts, sent
* 1306 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

away Vincent and Gregory with two sharp words, and became alone
within his private bedroom, sitting on his bed, staring at the wall above
his desk. Filling his mind like a Dementor had locked him into the memory.
The grey ﬂash coming from his glove, the lock clicking and falling
away—
Draco knew, he knew what he’d done wrong. He’d been so tired after
casting twenty-seven Locking Charms for all the other Dragon Warriors.
Less than a minute wasn’t enough time to recover after each spell. And
so he’d just cast Colloportus on his own padlocked glove, just cast the
spell, not put in all his strength to bind it stronger than Harry Potter or
Hermione Granger could undo.
But nobody was going to believe that, even if it was true. Even in
Slytherin, nobody would believe that. It sounded like an excuse, and an
excuse was all that anyone would hear.
Granger whirled and spun and screamed ‘ALOHOMORA!’—
Draco’s mind kept playing it over and over as the resentment built.
He’d helped Granger—cooperated with her on banning traitors—held her
hand as she’d dangled oﬀ the roof—stopped a riot from breaking out
around her in the Great Hall—did she have any idea what he’d risked,
what he’d probably already lost, what it meant for the heir of House
Malfoy to do that for a mudblood—
And now there was only one move left, and the thing about a forced
move was that you had to make it, even if it meant getting detention
and losing House points. Professor Snape would certainly understand
but there were limits (Father had warned him) to what Snape would
overlook.
Challenge Granger to a wizard’s duel, in open deﬁance of Hogwarts
regulations. Attack her outright, if she tried to refuse. Defeat her oneon-one, in public, not with clever dueling technique, but by overpowering her magic. Beat her solidly, completely, crush her as utterly as the
Dark Lord himself had crushed his enemies. Make it absolutely clear to
everyone, so that nobody could possibly doubt, that Draco had just been
exhausted from casting the spell so many times. Prove that the Malfoy
blood was stronger than any mudblood’s—
* 1307 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

Only it’s not, Harry Potter’s voice whispered inside Draco’s mind.
It’s easy to forget what’s really true, Draco, once you start trying to win
at politics. But in reality there’s only one thing that makes you a wizard,
remember?
Draco knew, then, he knew the reason for the disquiet in the back of
his mind, as he stared at the blank wall above his desk contemplating his
forced move. It should’ve been simple—when you only had one move,
the thing to do was make it—but—
Granger whirling, spinning, sweat-dampened hair ﬂying around her,
bolts ﬂying from her wand as fast as his own, jinx and counter-jinx, glowing
bats ﬂying at his face, and through all of it the look of fury in Granger’s eyes—
There’d been a part of him admiring that, before it had all gone
wrong, admiring Granger’s fury and power; a part of him that had exulted in the ﬁrst real ﬁght he’d ever been in, against...
...his ﬁrst equal opponent.
If he challenged Granger, and lost...
It ought not to be possible, Draco had gotten his wand two full years
before anyone else in his Hogwarts class.
Only there was a reason why they usually didn’t bother giving wands
to nine-year-olds. Age counted too, it wasn’t just how long you’d held a
wand. Granger’s birthday had been only a few days into the year, when
Harry had bought her that pouch. That meant she was twelve now, that
she’d been twelve almost since the start of Hogwarts. And the truth was,
Draco hadn’t been practicing much outside of class, probably not nearly
as much as Hermione Granger of Ravenclaw. Draco hadn’t thought he
needed any more practice to stay ahead...
And Granger was exhausted too, whispered the Voice of Contrary Evidence inside him. Granger must have been exhausted from all those
Stunning Hexes, and even in that state she’d been able to undo his Locking Charm.
And Draco could not aﬀord to challenge Granger publicly, one-onone with no excuses, and lose.
Draco knew what you were supposed to do in this sort of situation.
You were supposed to cheat. But if anyone discovered Draco cheating,
it would be disastrous, perfect blackmail material even if it never got
* 1308 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

out publicly, and any Slytherins watching would know that, they’d be
looking...
And then, if you were watching, you would have seen Draco Malfoy
get up from his bed, and go to his desk, and take out a sheet of the ﬁnest
sheepskin parchment, and a pearl-carven inkwell, ﬁlled with greenishsilver ink that had been made with true silver and crushed emeralds.
From the great trunk at his bed’s foot, the Slytherin drew forth a book
bound also in silver and emeralds, entitled The Etiquette of the Houses
of Britain. And with a new, clean quill, Draco Malfoy began to write,
frequently looking to the book where it lay open as a reference. There
was a grim smile on the boy’s face, making the young Malfoy look very
much like his father, as he carefully drew each letter as though it were a
separate artwork.
From Draco, son of Lucius son of Abraxis Lords of the Noble and Most
Ancient House of Malfoy, son also of Narcissa daughter of Druella Lady of
the Noble and Most Ancient House of Black, scion and heir of the Noble and
Most Ancient House of Malfoy:
To Hermione, the ﬁrst Granger:
(That form might have been meant to sound polite, long ago when
it had been invented; nowadays, after centuries of being used to address
mudbloods, it carried a lovely tinge of reﬁned venom.)
I, Draco, of Most Ancient House, demand redress, for
Draco paused, carefully moving the quill aside so that it wouldn’t
drip. He needed a pretext for this, at least if he wanted to impose the
duel’s conditions. The challenged had the choice of terms, unless they
had insulted a Noble House. He needed to make it look like Granger
had insulted him...
What was he thinking? Granger had insulted him.
Draco ﬂipped the book to the page of standard formulae, and found
one that seemed appropriate.
I, Draco, of Most Ancient House, demand redress, for that I have thrice
over helped you and oﬀered you only my goodwill, and in return you falsely
accused me of plotting against you,
Draco had to stop and take a breath, forcing down the seething anger;
he was starting to genuinely feel the insult now, and he’d just written
* 1309 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

out the last phrase and underlined it without thinking, like it was an
ordinary letter. After a moment’s reﬂection, he decided to let it stand; it
might not be the exact formal phrasing but it had a raw, angry tone that
seemed appropriate.
which insult you committed before the eyes of Britain.
Thus I, Draco, compel you, Hermione, by custom, by law, by
“The seventeenth ruling of the thirty-ﬁrst Wizengamot,” Draco said
aloud without looking, a line delivered in many plays; he sat straighter
as he said it, feeling every pulse of the noble blood in his veins.
Thus I, Draco, compel you, Hermione, by custom, by law, by the 17th
ruling of the 31st Wizengamot, to meet me in wizard’s duel with terms:
That we each come alone and in silence, speaking to none before or after,
If the duel went poorly, Draco could just say nothing and leave it at
that. And if he did defeat Granger, he would have learned experimentally
that he could beat her again in a public challenge. It wasn’t cheating, but
it was Science, which was almost as good.
contesting by magic solely, without death or lasting injury,
...where? Draco had been told about a room in Hogwarts that was
good for duels, where everything valuable was already protected by
wards, and there were no portraits to tattle on you... which one had
it been again...
in the trophy room of the Castle of the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft
and Wizardry,
And their second and public duel had better be soon, like tomorrow,
it would take very little time for his reputation in Slytherin to go irretrievably to sludge. He needed to ﬁght Granger for the ﬁrst time tonight.
upon midnight’s stroke that shall end this very day.
Draco, of the Noble and Most Ancient House of Malfoy.
Draco signed the formal parchment, and then drew forth his ordinary and lesser parchment, and his regular ink, for his post scriptum:
If you don’t know how the rules work, Granger, here’s how it is. You
insulted a Most Ancient House, and I’ve got the lawful right to challenge.
And if you aﬀront the conditions of the duel, like by having Flitwick show
up at the trophy room, or even just telling anyone else, my father will take
you and your false honor straight to the Wizengamot.
*

1310 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

Draco Malfo
On the last letter his quill pressed down on the parchment so viciously that the nib snapped oﬀ, creating a streak of ink and a small rip
in the parchment, which Draco decided also looked appropriate.

**
*
That night at dinnertime, Susan Bones came to Harry Potter and told
him that she thought Draco Malfoy was going to carry out his plot
against Hermione very soon. She was warning all the members of sphew,
and she’d warned Professor Sprout, and she’d warned Professor Flitwick,
and she was going to send a letter to her Aunt tonight, and now she
was warning Harry Potter, too. Only they couldn’t quite talk about
it with Padma—Susan said, looking very serious—because Padma was
feeling torn between her loyalty to Hermione and her loyalty to her
General.
Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres, who was at this point feeling more
frustrated with the entire situation than anything really productive,
snapped at her that yes, he knew something had to be done.
After Susan Bones left, Harry looked over at the other end of the
Ravenclaw table, where Hermione had sat down away from him or
Padma or Anthony or any of her other friends.
But Hermione didn’t look like she was in a mood where somebody
going over and bothering her would be taken very well.
Later, looking backward, Harry would think of how, in his sf and
fantasy novels, people always made their big, important choices for big,
important reasons. Hari Seldon had built his Foundation to rebuild the
ashes of the Galactic Empire, rather than because he would look more
important if he could be in charge of his own research group. Raistlin
Majere had severed ties with his brother because he wanted to become a
god, not because he was incompetent at personal relationships and unwilling to take advice on how to do better. Frodo Baggins had taken the
Ring because he was a hero who wanted to save Middle-Earth, not because it would’ve been too awkward not to. If anyone ever wrote a true
*

1311

*

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

history of the world— not that anyone ever could or would—probably
97% of all the key moments of Fate would turn out to be constructed of
lies and tissue paper and trivial little thoughts that somebody could’ve
just as easily thought diﬀerently.
Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres looked at Hermione Granger,
where she’d sat down at the other end of the table, and felt a sense of
reluctance to bother her when she looked like she was already in a bad
mood.
So then Harry thought that it probably made more sense to talk to
Draco Malfoy ﬁrst, just so that he could absolutely positively deﬁnitely
assure Hermione that Draco really wasn’t plotting against her.
And later on after dinner, when Harry went down to the Slytherin
basement and was told by Vincent that the boss ain’t to be disturbed...
then Harry thought that maybe he should see if Hermione would talk
to him right away. That he should just get started on unraveling the
whole mess before it raveled any further. Harry wondered if he might
just be procrastinating, if his mind had just found a clever excuse to put
oﬀ something unenjoyable-but-necessary.
He actually thought that.
And then Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres decided that he’d just talk
to Draco Malfoy the next morning instead, after Sunday breakfast, and
then talk to Hermione.
Human beings did that sort of thing all the time.

**
*
It was Sunday morning, on the 5th of April, 1992, and the simulated
sky above the Great Hall of Hogwarts showed great torrents of rain
pouring down in such density that the lightning ﬂashes were diminished
and scattered into small pulses of white light that sometimes transformed
the House tables, paling their faces and making all the students appear
brieﬂy to be ghosts.
Harry sat at the Ravenclaw table, wearily eating a waﬄe, waiting for
Draco to make an appearance so that he could get started on sorting this
*

1312 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

whole thing out. There was a Quibbler being passed around which had
somehow ended up with Hannah and Daphne on the front page, but it
hadn’t gotten to his place yet.
A few minutes later Harry ﬁnished eating his waﬄe, and then looked
around again to see if Draco had arrived yet for breakfast at the Slytherin
table.
It was odd.
Draco Malfoy was almost never late.
Since Harry was looking in the direction of the Slytherin table, he
didn’t see Hermione Granger entering through the huge doors of the
Great Hall. Thus he was rather startled when he turned back and discovered Hermione sitting down directly beside him at the Ravenclaw
table, just as if she hadn’t not-done that for more than a week.
“Hi, Harry,” Hermione said, her voice sounding almost exactly normal. She started to put toast on her plate and a selection of healthy fruits
and vegetables. “How are you?”
“Within one standard deviation of my own peculiar little average,”
Harry automatically replied. “How are you doing? Did you sleep okay?”
There were dark bags under Hermione Granger’s eyes.
“Why, yes, I’m ﬁne,” said Hermione Granger.
“Um,” Harry said. He took a slice of pie onto his plate (as his brain
was occupied with other things, Harry’s hand simply took the tastiest
thing within range, without evaluating complex concepts like whether
he was ready to eat dessert). “Um, Hermione, I’m going to need to talk
to you later today, is that okay?”
“Sure,” said Hermione. “Why wouldn’t it be?”
“Because—” Harry said. “I mean—you and I haven’t—for the last few
days—”
Shut up, suggested an internal part of Harry that seemed to have been
recently allocated for governing Hermione-related issues.
Hermione Granger didn’t look like she was paying much attention
to him in any case. She just stared down at her plate, and then, after
about ten seconds of awkward silence, began to eat her tomato slices,
one after another, without pause.
Harry looked away from her and began to eat a slice of pie which,
*

1313 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-EIGHT

*
*

*

he discovered, had somehow materialized on his plate.
“So!” Hermione Granger suddenly said after she’d polished oﬀ most
of her plate in silence. “Anything happening today?”
“Um...” Harry said. He looked around frantically, as though to ﬁnd
something-happening that he could use as conversational fodder.
And so Harry was one of the ﬁrst to see it, and wordlessly point,
although the sudden swell of whispers that swept through the Great Hall
showed that a number of other people had seen it too.
The distinctive crimson tinge of the robes would have been recognizable anywhere, but it still took Harry’s brain a few moments to place the
faces. An Asianish-looking man, solemn, and today looking rather grim.
A man with a piercing gaze that swept over the room, his long black hair
waving behind him in a ponytail. A man thin and pale and unshaven,
with a face so blank that it was like stone. It took Harry a few moment
to place the faces, and remember the names, from that long-ago day in
January when the Dementor had come to Hogwarts: Komodo, Butnaru,
Goryanof.
“An Auror trio?” Hermione said in a strange bright voice. “Why, I
wonder what they’d be doing here.”
Dumbledore was in their company as well, looking as worried as
Harry had ever seen him; and after a moment’s pause while the old wizard’s eyes scanned the Great Hall and the students whispering over their
breakfasts, he pointed—
—straight at Harry.
“Oh, now what,” Harry said under his breath. His inward thoughts
were a lot more panicked than that, as he wondered frantically if anyone
had connected him to the Azkaban breakout somehow. He looked at the
Head Table, trying to make the glance casual, and realized that Professor
Quirrell was nowhere to be seen, this morning—
The Aurors swept toward him with swift strides, Auror Goryanof
approaching from the other side of the Ravenclaw as though to block any
escape in that direction, Auror Komodo and Auror Butnaru approaching from Harry’s side, the Headmaster following straight on Komodo’s
heels.
All conversation everywhere had ground to utter silence.
*

1314 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS PRELUDE: CHEATING

*
*

*

The Aurors reached Harry’s place at the table, surrounding him from
three angles.
“Yes?” Harry said, as normally as he could. “What is it?”
“Hermione Granger,” Auror Komodo said in a toneless voice, “you
are under arrest for the attempted murder of Draco Malfoy.”

*

1315 *

CHAPTER

SE V ENT Y-NINE

TABOO TRADEOFFS, PART I
he words dropped into Harry’s consciousness and shattered his
thoughts into a hundred shards of incredulity, the shock of
adrenaline running into so much confusion that—
“She—” Harry said. “She—she wouldn’t—WHAT?”
The Aurors weren’t paying any attention to him. Komodo spoke
again, still in that colorless voice. “Mr. Malfoy has regained consciousness in St. Mungo’s and named you, Hermione Granger, as his assaulter.
He has repeated these accusations under two drops of Veritaserum. The
Blood-Chilling Charm you cast upon Mr. Malfoy would have killed him
if he had not been found and treated, and it must be presumed known
to you that this was a fatal curse. I therefore arrest you upon the serious
charge of attempted murder and you will be taken into Ministry custody
to be interrogated under three drops of Veritaserum—”
“Are you mad?” the words burst out of Harry’s mouth, as he shoved
himself up from the Ravenclaw table, an instant before Auror Butnaru’s
hand clamped down hard upon his shoulder. Harry ignored it. “That’s
Hermione Granger you’re trying to arrest, the nicest girl in Ravenclaw,
she helps Huﬄepuﬀs with their homework, she’d die before she tried to
kill anyone—”
Hermione Granger’s face had crumpled. “I did it,” she whispered in
a tiny voice. “It was me.”
Another huge rock fell on Harry’s thoughts and crushed their fragile
order, bursting fragments of comprehension into dust.
Dumbledore’s face seemed to have aged decades over the course of
seconds. “Why, Miss Granger?” Dumbledore said, his own voice barely
above a whisper. “Why would you do such a thing?”

T

*

1317 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

“I’m,” Hermione said, “I’m, I’m—sorry—I don’t know why I—” She
seemed to collapse in on herself, her voice was formed of nothing but
sobs, and the only words that could be made out were, “I thought—killed
him—sorry—”
And Harry should have said something, should have done something, should have jumped up out of his seat and stunned all three Aurors
and then gone on to some incredibly clever next move, but the twiceshattered fragments of his thought processes could yield no output. Butnaru’s hand pushed Harry gently but ﬁrmly back into his seat and Harry
found himself stuck there like he’d been glued, he tried to grab his wand
for a Finite and it wouldn’t come out of his pocket, the three Aurors
and Dumbledore escorted Hermione out of the Great Hall amid a rising storm of outcries and the doors began to swing shut behind them—
nothing made sense, it was surreal beyond all reckoning, like he’d been
transported into an alternate universe, and then Harry’s mind ﬂashed
back to another day of confusion and in a moment of desperate inspiration he ﬁnally realized what the Weasley twins had done to Rita Skeeter,
and his voice rose in a scream, “HERMIONE YOU DIDN’T DO IT
YOU’VE BEEN FALSE-MEMORY-CHARMED!”
But the doors had already shut.

**
*
Minerva couldn’t possibly have stood still, she paced back and forth
through the Headmaster’s oﬃce, the back of her mind half-expecting
Severus or Harry to tell her to shut up and sit down, but neither the Potions Master or the Boy-Who-Lived seemed much concerned with her,
both of their gazes focused on Albus Dumbledore where he had emerged
from the Floo. There were sounds in the background that nobody heard.
Severus seemed as passionless as ever, sitting in a small cushioned chair
beside the Headmaster’s desk. The old wizard stood terrible and upright by the still-burning ﬁreplace, robed in black like a starless night,
*

1318 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

radiating power and dismay. All her own thoughts were of utter confusion and horror. Harry Potter sat on a wooden stool with his ﬁngers
gripping the seat, and his eyes were fury and freezing ice.
At 6:33am, Quirinus Quirrell had Flooed St. Mungo’s from his oﬃce
for immediate pickup of Draco Malfoy. Professor Quirrell had found
Mr. Malfoy in the trophy room of Hogwarts, on the verge of death
from the continuing eﬀects of the Blood-Chilling Charm slowly lowering his body temperature. Professor Quirrell had immediately dispelled
the Charm, cast stabilizing spells on Mr. Malfoy, and levitated him to
his oﬃce to Floo him to St. Mungo’s for further treatment. After this,
Professor Quirrell had informed the Headmaster, stating the facts brieﬂy
before vanishing through the Floo; the Aurors, notiﬁed by St. Mungo’s,
had demanded his presence for questioning.
The clear intent of the Blood-Chilling Charm had been to kill Draco
Malfoy so slowly that the wards of Hogwarts, set to detect sudden injury, would not trigger. Under interrogation, Professor Quirrell had
told the Aurors that he had cast several tracking Charms upon Mr. Malfoy’s person in January, shortly after Mr. Malfoy’s return to Hogwarts
from Yuletime break. Professor Quirrell had cast tracking Charms because he had learned of a person with a motive to harm Mr. Malfoy. Professor Quirrell had refused to identify this person. The tracking Charms
which Professor Quirrell had cast were triggered by Mr. Malfoy’s health
falling below an absolute level, rather than by sudden changes, and had
therefore alerted Professor Quirrell before Mr. Malfoy had died.
Two drops of Veritaserum, suﬃcient to prevent Mr. Malfoy from
withholding any meliorating or moderating information in his statements, had shown that Mr. Malfoy had—legally under the laws of Noble
Houses, illegally under the regulations of Hogwarts—challenged Hermione Granger to a duel. Mr. Malfoy had won the duel but had then, as he
left, been attacked from behind by Miss Granger with a Stunning Hex.
After this Mr. Malfoy knew nothing.
Three drops of Veritaserum, requiring her to volunteer all relevant
information, had caused Hermione Granger to confess that she had
stunned Draco Malfoy from behind, and then, in a ﬁt of anger, cast the
Blood-Chilling Charm on him, with the deliberate intention of killing
*

1319 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

him slowly enough to evade identiﬁcation from the Hogwarts wards,
whose workings she had read about in Hogwarts: A History. She had
been horriﬁed at herself upon awakening the next morning, but had not
told anyone of what she’d done, believing Draco Malfoy to be already
dead—as he certainly would have been after seven hours, had his body’s
own magic not been resisting the eﬀects of the Blood-Chilling Charm.
“Her trial,” said Albus Dumbledore, “is set for tomorrow at noon.”
“What?” the word burst out of Harry Potter. The Boy-Who-Lived
didn’t rise from his chair, but Minerva saw his ﬁngers whiten where they
gripped the wooden seat beneath him. “That’s insane! You can’t do a
police investigation in one day—”
The Potions Master raised his voice. “This is not Muggle Britain,
Mr. Potter!” Severus’s face was as expressionless as ever, but the bite in
his voice was sharp. “The Aurors have an accusation under Veritaserum
and a confession under Veritaserum. So far as they are concerned, the
investigation is done.”
“Not quite,” said Dumbledore, just as Harry seemed ready to explode. “I have insisted to Amelia that this matter be given the utmost
scrutiny. Unfortunately, as the ill-fated duel was at midnight—”
“Supposed duel,” Harry said sharply.
“As the supposed duel was at midnight—yes, you’re quite right,
Harry—it is beyond the range of any Time-Turner—”
“Also supposedly,” the Boy-Who-Lived said coldly. “And rather suspiciously, since the alleged murder suspect doesn’t know about TimeTurners. I hope that an invisible Auror was immediately sent back in
time as far as possible to observe—”
Dumbledore inclined his head. “I went myself, Harry, the moment
I heard. But by the time I reached the trophy room, Mr. Malfoy was
already unconscious and Miss Granger had gone—”
“No,” said Harry Potter. “You reached the trophy room and saw
Draco unconscious. That is all you observed, Headmaster. You did not
observe Hermione there, or watch her leave. Let us distinguish observation from inference.” The boy’s head turned to look at her. “Imperius,
Obliviation, False Memory Charm, Legilimency. Professor McGonagall, am I leaving out any mind-aﬀecting spell that could have made Her* 1320 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

mione do this or make her believe she’d done it?”
“The Confundus Charm,” she said. And the Dark Arts had never
been her study, but she knew—“And certain Dark rituals. But none of
those could be performed in Hogwarts without alarm.”
The boy nodded, his eyes still directly addressing her. “Which of
those spells can be detected? Which would the Aurors try to detect?”
“The Confundus Charm would wear oﬀ in a few hours,” she said,
after a moment to gather her thoughts. “Miss Granger would remember the Imperius. Obliviation cannot be detected by any known means,
but only a Professor could have cast that spell upon a student without
alarm from the Hogwarts wards. Legilimency—can only be detected by
another Legilimens, I think—”
“I requested that Miss Granger be examined by the court Legilimens,” said Dumbledore. “The examination showed—”
“Do we trust him?” said Harry.
“Her,” said Dumbledore. “Sophie McJorgenson, whom I remember
as an honest student of Ravenclaw, and she is bound by the Unbreakable
Vow to tell the truth of what she sees—”
“Could someone else be Polyjuiced as her?” Harry Potter interrupted
again. “What did you observe, Headmaster?”
Albus said heavily, “A person who looked like Madam McJorgenson
told us that a single Legilimens had lightly touched Miss Granger’s mind
some months ago. That is from January, Harry, when I communicated
with Miss Granger about the matter of a certain Dementor. That was
expected; but what I did not expect was the rest of what Sophie found.”
The old wizard turned to gaze into the Floo ﬁre, letting the orange ﬂames
reﬂect on his face. “As you say, Harry, a False Memory Charm is one
possibility; they are, when cast perfectly, indistinguishable from true
memory—”
“That doesn’t surprise me,” Harry interrupted. “Studies show that
human memories are more or less rewritten every time we remember
them—”
“Harry,” Minerva said softly, and the boy’s mouth clamped shut.
The old wizard continued. “—but a False Memory Charm of such
quality requires as much time to create as a true memory. Creating a
*

1321 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

detailed memory of ten minutes would be ten minutes’ work. And according to the court Legilimens,” Albus’s face now seemed more tired
and lined than before, “Miss Granger has been obsessing over Mr. Malfoy since the day that Severus... yelled at her. She has been thinking of
how Mr. Malfoy might be in league with Professor Snape, how he might
be planning to harm her and harm Harry—imagining it for hours every
day—it would be impossible to create false memories for so much time.”
“The appearance of insanity...” Severus murmured softly, as though
he were speaking to himself. “Could it be natural? No, it is too disastrous
to be pure accident; too convenient for someone, I have no doubt. A
Muggle drug, perhaps? But that would not be enough—Miss Granger’s
madness would have to be guided—”
“Ah!” Harry said suddenly. “I get it now. The ﬁrst False Memory
Charm was cast on Hermione after Professor Snape yelled at her, and
showed, say, Draco and Professor Snape plotting to kill her. Then last
night that False Memory was removed by Obliviation, leaving behind
the memories of her obsessing about Draco for no apparent reason, at
the same time she and Draco were given false memories of the duel.”
Minerva blinked in startlement. It would have been a thousand years
before she thought of that possibility.
The Potions Master was frowning thoughtfully, eyes intent. “The reaction to a False Memory Charm is hard to predict in advance, Mr. Potter, without Legilimency. The subjects do not always act as expected,
when they ﬁrst remember the false memories. It would have been a risky
ploy. But I suppose that is one way Professor Quirrell could have done
it.”
“Professor Quirrell?” said Harry. “What motive does he have to—”
The Potions Master said dryly, “The Defense Professor is always a
suspect, Mr. Potter. You will notice a trend, given time.”
Albus raised up a hand, a silencing gesture, and their heads all turned
to look at him. “But in this case there is another suspect,” Albus said
quietly. “Voldemort.”
That deadliest of unspeakable words seemed to echo around the
room, canceling all the heat from the orange ﬂames of the ﬁreplace.
“I do not know,” the old wizard said slowly, “I know all too little, of
* 1322 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

the methods of Voldemort’s immortality. He searched out those books
before I did, I think. All I could ﬁnd were ancient tales, scattered across
too many volumes for him to remove. But to ﬁnd truth among many
stories is also a wizard’s mastery, and this I have endeavored to do. There
is a human sacriﬁce, a murder, of that I am certain; committed in coldest blood, the victim dying in horror. And old, old tales of wizards
possessed, doing mad deeds, claiming the names of Dark Lords thought
defeated; and there is usually a device, of that Dark Lord, which they
wield...” Albus looked at Harry, the ancient eyes searching the younger.
“I think, Harry—though you will call it only inference—that the act of
murder splits the soul. That by ritual of blackest horror, the torn fragment of soul is chained to this world. To a material thing of this world.
Which must be, or which then becomes, a device of power.”
Horcrux. The terrible name echoed in Minerva’s mind, though it
seemed that—for what reason she did not know—Albus would not speak
that word in front of Harry.
“And therefore,” the old wizard ﬁnished quietly, “the remainder of
the soul is bound to its chained part, lingering here when its body is destroyed. A sad and painful existence, I think it would be; less than spirit,
less than the meanest ghost...” The old wizard’s eyes were locked on
Harry, who gazed back with his eyes narrowed. “It would take time for
that mutilated soul to regain a mockery of life. That is why we have had
our ten-year reprieve, I believe; why Voldemort did not return at once.
But in time... that revenant would become capable of rising again.” The
old wizard spoke with grim precision. “It is clear, from the stories, that
the Dark Lords who return by possessing another’s form, wield lesser
magics than they once knew. I do not think Voldemort would be satisﬁed with that. He would take some other avenue to life. But Voldemort
was more Slytherin than Salazar, grasping at every opportunity. He
would use his pitiful state, use his power of possession, if he had reason.
If he could beneﬁt by another’s... inexplicable fury.” Albus’s voice had
fallen to almost a whisper. “That is what I suspect happened to Miss
Granger.”
Minerva’s throat was very dry. “He’s here,” she gasped. “Here, in
Hogwarts—”
* 1323 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

Then she stopped, because the reason Voldemort had come to Hogwarts—
The old wizard glanced at her only brieﬂy, and said, still in that whisper, “I am sorry, Minerva, you were right.”
Harry’s voice was edged. “Right about what?”
“Voldemort’s strongest avenue to life,” Dumbledore said heavily.
“The most desirable road for him, by which he would rise greater and
more terrible than ever before. It is guarded here, within this castle—”
“Excuse me,” Harry said politely. “Are you stupid?”
“Harry,” she said, but there was no force in her voice.
“I mean, maybe you haven’t noticed this, Headmaster Dumbledore,
but this castle is full of children—”
“I had no choice!” bellowed Dumbledore. The blue eyes were blazing now, beneath the half-moon spectacles. “I do not own it, that thing
which Voldemort desires. It belongs to another, and is held here by his
consent! I asked if it could be kept in the Department of Mysteries. But
he would not permit that—he said it must be within the wards of Hogwarts, in the place of the Founders’ protection—” Dumbledore passed his
hand across his forehead. “No,” the old wizard said in a quieter voice.
“I cannot pass this blame to him. He is right. There is too much power
in that thing, too much that men desire. I agreed that the trap should
be laid behind the wards of Hogwarts, in the place of my own power.”
The old wizard bowed his head. “I knew Voldemort would worm his
way here somehow, and planned to trap him. I did not think—I did not
dream—that he would tarry in an enemy fortress one minute longer than
he must.”
“But,” said Severus in some puzzlement, “what would the Dark Lord
possibly gain by killing Lucius’s only heir?”
“Point of order,” Harry Potter said, a hard edge in his voice. “The
motives of whoever’s behind this are not the primary issue. Our top
priority at this point is that an innocent Hogwarts student is in trouble!”
The green eyes locked with the blue, as Albus Dumbledore gazed
back at the Boy-Who-Lived—
“Quite right, Mr. Potter,” Minerva said, she hadn’t even thought
about it, the words just seemed to pop out of her lips. “Albus, who
* 1324 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

is watching over Miss Granger now?”
“Professor Flitwick has gone to her,” the Headmaster said.
“She needs a lawyer,” Harry said. “Anyone who just blurts out ‘I did
it’ to the police—”
“Unfortunately,” Minerva said, her tone taking on some of Professor
McGonagall’s sternness without thinking, “I doubt a lawyer will be any
use to Miss Granger at this point, Mr. Potter. She is to face the judgment
of the Wizengamot, and they would be exceedingly unlikely to free her
on a technicality.”
Harry was looking at her with an utterly incredulous expression, as
though suggesting that Hermione Granger didn’t need a lawyer was akin
to suggesting that she be set on ﬁre.
“She is correct, Mr. Potter,” Severus said quietly. “Few court processes in this country involve lawyers.”
Harry lifted his glasses and rubbed his eyes, brieﬂy. “Fine. How
do we get Hermione oﬀ the hook, exactly? I suppose it’s too much to
hope that with all the lawyers gone, the judges understand the concept
of ‘common sense’ and ‘prior probability’ well enough to realize that
twelve-year-old girls basically never commit cold-blooded murders?”
“It is the Wizengamot that she faces,” said Severus. “The oldest
Noble Houses, and certain other wizards of inﬂuence.” Severus’s face
twisted in something approaching his customary sarcasm. “As for them
showing common sense—you might as well expect them to make you a
bacon sandwich, Potter.”
Harry nodded, his mouth set. “Exactly what sort of penalty is Hermione facing? Snapped wand and expulsion—”
“No,” Severus said. “Nothing that light. Are you willfully misunderstanding, Potter? She is facing the Wizengamot. There is no set penalty.
There is only the vote.”
Harry Potter murmured, “The rule of law, in complex times, has proved
itself deﬁcient; we much prefer the rule of men, it’s vastly more eﬃcient...
There’s no constraining legal rules at all, then?”
Light glinted oﬀ the old wizard’s half-moon glasses; he spoke carefully, and not without anger. “Legally, Harry, we are dealing with a
blood debt from Hermione Granger to the House of Malfoy. The Lord
* 1325 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

of Malfoy proposes a repayment of that debt, and then the Wizengamot
votes on his proposal. That is all.”
“But...” Harry said slowly. “Lucius was Sorted into Slytherin, he’s
got to realize that Hermione was just a pawn. Not the one he should
actually be angry at. Right?”
“No, Harry Potter,” Albus Dumbledore said heavily. “That is how
you wish Lucius Malfoy would think. Lucius Malfoy himself... will not
share your desire that he think that way.”
Harry gazed at the Headmaster, his eyes growing colder, at the same
time that Minerva herself had to clamp down harder on her own emotions, stop her pacing and try to breathe. She’d been trying not to think
about it, trying to turn her thoughts away from it, but she knew. She’d
known since the instant she’d heard. She could see it in Albus’s eyes—
“Is she facing capital punishment?” Harry said quietly, and chills
went all the way down Minerva’s spine at the undertones of that voice.
“No!” Albus said. “No, not the Kiss, not Azkaban, not for a ﬁrstyear in Hogwarts. Our country is not so lost, not yet.”
“But Lucius Malfoy,” Severus said tonelessly, “certainly will not be
satisﬁed with only snapping her wand.”
“All right,” Harry said commandingly. “As I see it, we’ve got two
essential lines of attack. Line one, ﬁnd the real culprit. Line two, other
leverage over Lucius. Professor Quirrell saved Draco’s life, does that
create a blood debt from House Malfoy to him that he could redeem to
cancel Hermione’s?”
Minerva blinked in startlement again.
“No,” Dumbledore said. The old wizard shook his head. “It was
a clever thought—but no, Harry, I’m afraid not. Even in the unlikely
event that our Defense Professor reveals himself to be of a Noble House,
there is an exception when the Wizengamot suspects that the life-debt
may have been created deliberately, for that very purpose. And the Defense Professor is hardly above suspicion. Thus Lucius would argue.”
Harry nodded once, face set. “So a commoner can have a blood
debt to a Noble House, but not vice versa. Somehow I’m not surprised.
But House Potter does count as a Noble House, from what I’ve heard.
Headmaster, I know I said I wouldn’t—but under the circumstances—
* 1326 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

that time Draco cast that torture hex on me, is that debt enough—”
“No,” the old wizard said (even as she blurted “What?” and Severus
lifted an eyebrow). “It would not have been enough, and now it is
no debt at all. You are an Occlumens and cannot testify under Veritaserum. Draco Malfoy could be Obliviated of his own memory before
he could testify—” Albus hesitated. “Harry... whatever you have done
with Draco, you must assume that Lucius Malfoy will soon know of it.”
Harry’s head sank into his hands. “He’ll give Draco Veritaserum.”
“Yes,” Albus said quietly.
The Boy-Who-Lived didn’t say anything, as he sat with his head in
his hands.
The Potions Master looked genuinely shocked. “Draco really was
trying to help Miss Granger,” Severus said. “You—Potter, you actually—”
“Turned him?” Harry said from between his hands. “I was about
three-quarters done. Taught him the Patronus Charm and everything. I
don’t know what will happen now, though.”
“Voldemort has struck a grave blow against us, this day,” Albus said.
The sound of old wizard’s voice was like the look of the boy with his
head in his hands. “He has taken two of our pieces, with one... No.
I should have seen it earlier. He has taken two of Harry’s pieces with
one move. Voldemort has begun his game again, not against myself, but
against Harry. Voldemort knows the prophecy, he knows who his last
foe shall be. He is not waiting to face Hermione Granger and Draco
Malfoy at Harry’s side when they are grown. He is striking at them
now.”
“Maybe it’s You-Know-Who and maybe it isn’t,” Harry said, his
voice sounding a little unsteady. “Let’s not narrow down the hypothesis
space prematurely.” Harry took a breath and lowered his hands. “The
other thing we can try is to nail the real culprit before the trial—or at
least ﬁnd solid evidence that someone else did it.”
“Mr. Potter,” said Minerva, “Professor Quirrell told the Aurors that
he knew of someone with a motive to harm Mr. Malfoy. Do you know
who he was talking about?”
“Yes,” Harry said, after a hesitation. “But I think I shall conduct that
part of my investigation with the Defense Professor—just as I would not
* 1327 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

have Professor Quirrell in the room while we were discussing how to
investigate him.”
“He suspects me?” Severus said, then gave a short laugh. “Why, of
course he does.”
“My own plan,” said Harry, “is to go look at the trophy room where
the supposed duel took place and see if I can discover anything anomalous. If you can tell the investigating Aurors to let me through—”
“What investigating Aurors?” Severus said tonelessly.
Harry Potter took a deep breath, slowly let it out, and then spoke
again. “In mystery books it usually takes longer than one day to solve
a crime, but twenty-six hours is—no, thirty hours is eighteen hundred
minutes. And I can think of at least one other important place to look
for clues—though it’ll have to be someone who can get into the Ravenclaw girls’ dorm. Back when Hermione was ﬁghting bullies, she was
ﬁnding notes under her pillow each morning, telling her where to go—”
“Albus...” ground out Minerva.
“I did not send them,” said the old wizard. His white eyebrows had
lifted in surprise. “I knew nothing of this. You think she was being
played, Harry?”
“It’s a possibility,” Harry said. “More so, because there’s a part of this
puzzle that you don’t know about yet.” Harry’s voice lowered, grew
more intense. “Headmaster, you already know that I got my father’s
invisibility cloak from someone who left a note under my pillow signed
‘Santa Claus’. I think we have to assume that’s the same person who left
notes for Hermione—”
“Harry,” the old wizard said, and hesitated momentarily. “Returning
your father’s cloak to you, does not seem to me like the act of a villain—”
“Listen,” Harry Potter said urgently. “The part you don’t know is
that after Bellatrix Black escaped from Azkaban, I found another note
under my pillow, also signed ‘Santa Claus’, saying that they’d heard you
were shutting me up inside Hogwarts, and that they were giving me
an escape route to the Salem Witches’ Institute in America. That note
came with a deck of cards, in which the King of Hearts was supposedly
a portkey—”
“Mr. Potter!” cried Professor McGonagall, she hadn’t even thought
* 1328 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

before she spoke. “That could well be a kidnapping attempt! You should
have told—”
“Yes, Professor, I did the sensible thing,” the boy said levelly. “As
adapted to the circumstances, I did the sensible thing. I told Professor
Quirrell. And according to Professor Quirrell, that portkey goes to
somewhere in London—it’s deﬁnitely not strong enough to be an international portkey. Now it’s possible that the person who sent the note
is honest, and that the point in London is just a way station.” The boy
reached into his robes and took out a deck of cards, along with a folded
paper note. “I will trust you not to go in guns blazing—I mean wands
blazing—just in case the sender is an ally of mine, if not yours. But if
this is a trap, I say we spring it now. And whoever it is, take them alive
so we can exhibit them before the Wizengamot, I cannot overemphasize
that part.”
Severus rose from his chair, his eyes now intent, and moved toward
Harry. “I’ll need a hair of yours for Polyjuice, Mr. Potter—”
“Let us not be hasty!” said Albus. “We have not yet examined the
notes sent to Miss Granger; there may be no resemblance after all.
Severus, would you enter her dorm room and see if you can ﬁnd those?”
Harry’s eyebrows had raised, even as he stood to oﬀer the Potions
Master better access to his mess of hair. “You think two diﬀerent people
are running around Hogwarts leaving notes beneath pillows?”
Severus gave a brief sardonic laugh, as his hand moved forward and
plucked a hair, which soon was being carefully wrapped in silk. “Quite
possibly. If I have learned anything in my tenure as Head of Slytherin, I
have learned what ridiculous messes arise when there is more than one
plotter and more than one plan. But Headmaster—I think Mr. Potter is
correct that I should follow this portkey and see where it leads.”
Albus hesitated, and then nodded reluctantly. “I will speak to you
before you go, then.”

**
*
Even as Harry Potter left the room for his own investigations, Severus
had spun on his heel and was striding swiftly toward the jar of Floo
* 1329 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

powder, his cloak rising behind him with his speed. “I’ll get some raw
Polyjuice, add the hair, and go. Headmaster, will you stand by to—”
“Albus,” Minerva said, surprised at how steady her own voice was,
“did you leave those notes under Mr. Potter’s pillow?”
Severus’s hand halted an instant before casting Floo powder into the
ﬁre.
Dumbledore nodded to her, though the accompanying smile seemed
a bit hollow. “You know me far too well, my dear.”
“And I suppose the portkey goes to a friendly home where Mr. Potter
would be kept safe and sound until you arrived to pick him up and return
him to Hogwarts?” Her voice tight—it was sensible, she could not deny
it was sensible, but somehow it seemed a little cruel.
“It would have depended on the circumstances,” the old wizard said
quietly. “If Harry had gone so far—I might have let him make good his
escape, for a time. Better to know where he was going, and ensure it was
somewhere safe, with friends—”
“And to think,” said Professor McGonagall, “that I had thought to
reprimand Mr. Potter for not telling us about this important matter!
Upbraid him for not having the sense to trust us!” Her voice had risen
in volume. “I shall skip that lecture, I suppose!”
Severus was gazing at the Headmaster with narrowed eyes. “And the
notes to Miss Granger—”
“The Defense Professor, very likely,” the old wizard said. “Still—that
is only a guess.”
“I shall go look for them,” Severus said. “And then, I suppose, start
looking for You-Know-Who.” A frown crossed the Potions Master’s face.
“A task at which I haven’t the faintest idea of where to start. Do you
know of any magics to ﬁnd a soul, Headmaster?”

**
*
The Divination classroom was lit by the dim red light of a hundred small
ﬁres where burned a hundred kinds of incense, so that if you were to ask
in one word what the room looked like, the answer would be ‘smoke’.
* 1330 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

(Assuming you bothered to look at anything, when your nose was threatening to overload and die.) If your gaze could pierce those dank mists,
you would see a tiny, cluttered room in which forty stuﬀed armchairs,
most of them unused, were crammed around a small open space in the
center of the room, where a circular trapdoor waited on your escape.
“The grim!” Professor Trelawney said in a quavering voice, as she
peered into George Weasley’s teacup. “The grim! It is a sign of death!
One whom you know, George—someone you know is to die! And
soon—yes, it shall be quite soon, I think—unless of course it is later—”
It would have been a good deal scarier, thought Fred and George,
if she hadn’t said the same thing to every single other student in their
Divination class. They were hardly even thinking about it at this point;
all their thoughts were on today’s disaster—
The trapdoor in the ﬂoor ﬂew open with a bang that caused Professor
Trelawney to shriek and spill George’s tea all over his robes, and then
an instant later Dumbledore was whooshing up out of the ﬂoor with a
bird of ﬁre upon his shoulder.
“Fred!” the old wizard said commandingly. His robes were the black
of a moonless night, his eyes hard like blue diamonds. “George! With
me, now!”
There was an collective gasp and by the time Fred and George were
climbing down the ladder after the Headmaster, the entire class was already speculating what role they’d played in the attempted murder of
Draco Malfoy.
The trapdoor had hardly slammed shut above them before all nearby
sounds muted and the old wizard spun on them and held out a hand and
commanded, “Give me the map!”
“M-map?” said Fred or George in total shock. They’d never even
suspected that Dumbledore suspected. “Why, w-we don’t know what
you’re—”
“Hermione Granger is in trouble,” said the old wizard.
“The Map is in our dorm,” George or Fred said immediately. “Just
give us a few minutes to get it and we’ll—”
The wizard’s arms swept them up as if they were hugging-pillows,
there was a piercing cry and a ﬂash of ﬁre and then the three of them
*

1331 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

were in the third-year Gryﬃndor’s boys’ dorm.
A few moments later, Fred and George were handing over the Map to
the Headmaster, wincing only slightly at the sacrilege of giving their precious piece of the Hogwarts security system to the person who actually
owned it, and the old wizard was frowning at the apparent blankness.
“You’ve got to say,” they explained, “I solemnly swear that I am up to
no good—”
“I decline to lie,” said the old wizard. He held the Map high and bellowed, “Hear me, Hogwarts! Deligitor prodi!” An instant later the Headmaster was wearing the Sorting Hat, which looked scarily right upon his
head, as though Dumbledore had always been waiting for a patchwork
pointed hat to complete his existence.
(Fred and George immediately memorized this phrase, just in case it
would work for somebody besides the Headmaster, and began trying to
think of pranks that would involve the Sorting Hat.)
The old wizard wasted not a moment before sweeping the Sorting
Hat oﬀ his head and turning it upside-down—it was hard to tell with the
Hat upside-down, but it looked a bit cross at the treatment—and then
plunged in his hand and drew out a crystal rod. With this instrument
he began tracing rune-like patterns on the Map, muttering strange incantations that sounded not quite like Latin and echoed in their ears in
an unusually creepy fashion. In the midst of tracing one rune he looked
up at both of them, ﬁxing them with a sharp glare. “I will return this to
you later, sons of Weasley. Go back to class.”
“Yes, Headmaster,” they said, and hesitated. “Ah—about Hermione
Granger, is she really going to be bound to serve Draco Malfoy forever
as his—”
“Go,” said the old wizard.
They went.
When he was alone in the room, the old wizard looked down at the
map, which had now written upon itself a ﬁne line drawing of the Gryfﬁndor dorms in which they stood, the small handwritten Albus P.W.B.
Dumbledore the only name left therein.
The old wizard smoothed the map, bent over it, and whispered,
“Find Tom Riddle.”
* 1332 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

**
*

The interrogation room at the Department of Magical Law Enforcement
was usually lit by a small orange light, so that the Auror interrogating
you would be leaning toward your uncomfortable metal chair with most
of their face in shadow, preventing you from reading their expression,
even as they read yours.
As soon as Mr. Quirrell had entered the room, the small orange light
had dimmed and begun ﬂickering like a candle about to be blown out
by the wind. The room was now lit by a sourceless ice-colored glow
which illuminated all of Mr. Quirrell’s pale skin like alabaster, except,
somehow, his eyes, which stayed in darkness.
The Auror on duty outside had surreptitiously tried to dispel this
eﬀect four times without the slightest success, despite the fact that
Mr. Quirrell had politely surrendered his wand upon being detained for
interrogation, and had shown no sign of speaking any incantations nor
exerting any other power.
“Quirinus... Quirrell,” drawled the man now sitting across from
where the Defense Professor had waited courteously. The interrogator
had tawny hair that swept back like a lion’s mane, with yellowish eyes
set into the sternly lined face of a man late in his tenth decade. The man
was, at this moment, leaﬁng through a large folder of parchments that
he had taken from a black and very solid-looking briefcase after he had
limped into the room and sat down, seeming not to look at the face of
the man he was interrogating. He had not introduced himself.
After some further leaﬁng through parchments, carried out in silence, the Auror spoke again. “Born the 26th of September, 1955, to
Quondia Quirrell, of an acknowledged tryst with Lirinus Lumblung...”
intoned the Auror. “Sorted into Ravenclaw... O.W.L.S. quite good...
N.E.W.T.S. in Charms, Transﬁguration... an Outstanding in Muggle
Studies, impressive... Ancient Runes, and ah yes, Defense. An Outstanding in that as well. Went on to become quite the tourist, visiting all
sorts of places. Portkey visas for Transylvania, the Forbidden Empire,
* 1333 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

the City of Endless Night... my my, Texas.” The man looked up from the
portfolio, eyes narrowed. “What were you doing there, Mr. Quirrell?”
“Sightseeing, mostly in the Muggle areas,” the Defense Professor said
easily. “As you say, I am quite the tourist.”
The man listened to this with a frown, then looked back down, then
up again. “I also see that you visited Fuyuki City in 1983.”
The Defense Professor lifted an eyebrow in mild puzzlement. “What
of it?”
“What did you do in Fuyuki City?” The question snapped out razorsharp.
The Defense Professor frowned slightly. “Nothing of any account.
I visited some better-known sights, some less-known sights, and aside
from that, kept to myself.”
“Really?” the Auror said softly. “I ﬁnd that reply rather interesting.”
“How so?” said the Defense Professor.
“Because there was no visa listed for Fuyuki City.” The man slammed
the folder shut. “You’re not Quirinus Quirrell. Who the hell are you?”

**
*
The Potions Master walked quietly into the Ravenclaw girls’ dorm, the
ﬁrst-year dorm room, a festive place where bronze and blue competed
to be the color of stuﬀed animals, scarves and dresses, small bits of inexpensive jewelry, and posters of famous people. Hermione Granger’s
bed was easy to identify; it was the one that had been attacked by a book
monster.
Nobody else seemed to be around, at that time of day, and a number
of spells veriﬁed this.
The Potions Master searched under Hermione Granger’s pillow,
and beneath her bed, and then began going through her trunk, sorting through mentionable and unmentionable items without change of
expression, and ﬁnally succeeded in drawing forth a set of papers describing places and times where bullies would be found, all of the papers
signed only with an elaborate ‘S’.
* 1334 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

A brief burst of ﬁre later, the papers were gone, and the Potions
Master left to report the failure of his mission.

**
*
The Defense Professor was sitting calmly with his hands still folded in his
lap. “If you consult Headmaster Dumbledore,” said the Defense Professor, “you will ﬁnd that he is well aware of this matter, and that I agreed
to teach his Defense class on the explicit condition that no inquiry be
made into my—”
In a lightning motion, the interrogator whipped out his wand and
spat “Polyﬂuis Reverso!” at the same time that the Defense Professor
sneezed, which somehow caused the mirror-silvered ray to disrupt in
a shower of white sparks.
“Pardon me,” the Defense Professor said politely.
The smile that the Auror gave had absolutely no mirth in it. “So
where’s the real Quirinus Quirrell, eh? Under an Imperius in the bottom
of a trunk somewhere, while you take a hair now and then for your
illegal Polyjuice?”
“You are making highly questionable assumptions,” the Defense Professor said with an edged voice. “What makes you think I did not steal
his body outright using incredibly Dark magic?”
This was followed by a certain pause.
“I suggest,” the Auror said, “that you take this seriously,
Mr. Whoever-You-Are.”
“I’m sorry,” said the Defense Professor, leaning back in his chair, “but
I see little reason to humble myself on this particular occasion. What are
you going to do, kill me?”
“I don’t appreciate your humor,” the Auror said softly.
“How unfortunate for you, Rufus Scrimgeour,” said the Defense Professor. “You have my deepest sympathy.” He tilted his head, seeming to
study the interrogator; and even within the shadow of the ice-light, the
eyes glinted.

**
*
* 1335 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

Padma stared down at her plate.
“Hermione wouldn’t just do that!” yelled Mandy Brocklehurst, who
was practically in tears, in fact she was in tears, her voice would have
been loud enough to silence the Great Hall if it hadn’t been for all the
other students also screaming at each other. “I—I bet Malfoy tried to—
to do things to her—”
“Our General would never do that!” Kevin Entwhistle yelled even
louder than Mandy.
“Of course he would!” shouted Anthony Goldstein. “Malfoy’s the
son of a Death Eater!”
Padma stared down at her plate.
Draco was the General of her army.
Hermione was the founder of S.P.H.E.W.
Draco had trusted her to be his second-in-command.
Hermione was her fellow Ravenclaw.
Both of them were her friends, maybe the two best friends she had
besides family.
Padma stared down at her plate. She was glad the Sorting Hat hadn’t
oﬀered her Huﬄepuﬀ. If she’d been Sorted into Huﬄepuﬀ it would
probably have been much more painful, trying to decide where her divided loyalties lay...
She blinked and realized that her vision had gotten blurry again, and
raised a trembling hand to wipe once more at her eyes.
Morag MacDougal snorted so loudly it was audible even amid the
pandemonium of lunch, and said in a loud voice, “I bet Granger cheated
in her battle yesterday, I bet that’s why Malfoy challenged her -”
“All of you Shut up!” roared Harry Potter, as he hit the table with his
ﬁsts so hard that plates rattled all the way along it.
At any other time it would have gotten Professors reprimanding him,
this time it just got a few nearby students to look.
“I’d wanted to eat lunch,” Harry Potter said, “and then get back to
investigating, so I wasn’t going to talk. But you’re all being silly, and
when the truth comes out you’re going to regret what you said about

* 1336 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

innocent people. Draco didn’t do anything, Hermione didn’t do anything, they were both False-Memory-Charmed!” Harry Potter’s voice
had been rising on the last words. “How is that not Bloody Obvious?”
“You think we’ll believe that?” Kevin Entwhistle yelled right back at
him. “That’s what everyone says! ‘I didn’t do it, it was all just a False
Memory Charm!’ You think we’re stupid?”
And Morag nodded right along with him, with a condescending
look.
The look that came over Harry Potter’s face then made Padma ﬂinch.
“I see,” Harry Potter said, it wasn’t a shout so Padma had to strain to
hear it. “Professor Quirrell isn’t here to explain to me how stupid people are, but I bet this time I can get it on my own. People do something
dumb and get caught and are given Veritaserum. Not romantic master criminals, because they wouldn’t get caught, they would have learned
Occlumency. Sad, pathetic, incompetent criminals get caught, and confess under Veritaserum, and they’re desperate to stay out of Azkaban so
they say they were False-Memory-Charmed. Right? So your brain, by
sheer Pavlovian association, links the idea of False Memory Charms to
pathetic criminals with unbelievable excuses. You don’t have to consider
the speciﬁc details, your brain just pattern-matches the hypothesis into a
bucket of things you don’t believe, and you’re done. Just like my father
thought that magical hypotheses could never be believed, because he’d
heard so many stupid people talking about magic. Believing a hypothesis
that involves False Memory Charms is low-status.”
“What are you blithering about?” said Morag, looking down her nose
at the Boy-Who-Lived.
“You think we’d believe anything you say?” yelled a slightly olderlooking Ravenclaw witch who Padma didn’t recognize. “When you
turned Granger Dark?”
“And I’m not going to complain,” Harry Potter said in an eerily calm
voice, “about wizards not having any logic and believing the craziest
things. Because I said that to Professor Quirrell once, and he just gave
me this look and said that if I wasn’t blinded by my upbringing I could
think of a hundred more ridiculous things that lots of Muggles believe.
What you’re all doing is very human and very normal and doesn’t make
* 1337 *

**
*

CHAPTER SE V ENT Y-NINE

*
*

*

you unusually bad people, so I’m not going to complain.” The Boy-WhoLived rose up from his bench. “I’ll see you all later.”
And Harry Potter walked away from them, walked away from all of
them.
“You’re not thinking he’s right, are you?” said Su Li from beside her,
in a tone which made it clear what she thought.
“I—” said Padma. Her words seemed to be caught in her throat, her
thoughts seemed to be caught in her head. “I—I mean—I—”

**
*
If you think hard enough you can do the impossible.
(It had always been an article of faith with Harry. There’d been a
time when he’d acknowledged the laws of physics as ultimate limitations,
and now he suspected there were no true limits at all.)
If you think fast enough you can sometimes do the impossible
quickly...
...sometimes.
Only sometimes.
Not always.
Not reliably.
The Boy-Who-Lived stared around the trophy room, surrounded by
awards and cups and plates and shields and statues and medals kept behind thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, of crystal glass displays. For
as many centuries as Hogwarts had existed, this room had been accumulating details. A week, a month, maybe even a year, wouldn’t have
suﬃced to take the ‘examine’ option on every item in the room. Harry
had asked Professor Flitwick if there was any way to detect damage to
the wards around the crystal cases, verify the residue that a real duel
should have left behind. Harry had raced through the Hogwarts library
looking for spells to tell the diﬀerence between old ﬁngerprints and new
ﬁngerprints, or to detect lingering exhalations in a room. And all these
attempts at playing detective had failed.
There were no clues, none that he was smart enough to ﬁnd.
* 1338 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS I

*
*

*

Professor Snape had said that the portkey led to an empty house in
London, with no sign of anyone or anything else.
Professor Snape hadn’t found any notes in Hermione’s dorm.
Headmaster Dumbledore had said that Voldemort’s spirit was probably hiding out in the Chamber of Secrets where the Hogwarts security
system couldn’t ﬁnd him. Harry had snuck into the Slytherin dungeons
under the Cloak of Invisibility and spent the rest of the afternoon looking through all the obvious places, but he hadn’t found anything snaky
that answered back when spoken to. The entrance to the Chamber of
Secrets, it seemed, hadn’t been meant to be found in a day.
Harry had talked to all of Hermione’s friends that would still talk
to him, and none of them had remembered Hermione saying anything
speciﬁc about why she’d believed that Draco was plotting against her.
Professor Quirrell hadn’t come back from the Ministry as of dinnertime. The older students seemed to think that this year’s Defense Professor would probably end up being blamed for the incident, and ﬁred
for teaching Hogwarts students to be too violent. They’d talked about
the Defense Professor as though he were already gone.
Harry had used up all six hours from his Time-Turner, and there
were still no clues, and he had to go to sleep now if he wanted to be
functional at Hermione’s trial the next day.
The Boy-Who-Destroyed-a-Dementor was standing in the middle of
the Hogwarts trophy room, his wand dropped at his feet.
He was crying.
Sometimes you call your brain and it doesn’t answer.
The trial of Hermione Granger started on schedule the next day.

* 1339 *

CHAPTER

EIGHT Y

TABOO TRADEOFFS,
PART II:
THE HORNS EFFECT
he Most Ancient Hall of the Wizengamot is cool and dark, with
concentric half-circles of stone rising up from the lowest center,
and simple wooden benches set down upon those elevated half-circles.
There is no source of light, but the chamber is well-lit, without any apparent cause or reason; it is simply a brute fact that the hall is well-lit.
The walls like the ﬂoor are stone, dark stone, some elegant and mysterious conjugation of rock most ﬁne to gaze upon, with a smooth texture
that seems to ﬂow and shift beneath its surface. This is the Most Ancient
Hall, the oldest place of wizardry that has lasted into the modern day;
every other place of power was destroyed in one war or another. This
is the Hall of the Wizengamot, which is most ancient because the wars
ended with the building of this place.
This is the Hall of the Wizengamot; there are older places, but they
are hidden. Legend holds that the walls of dark stone were conjured,
created, willed into existence by Merlin, when he gathered the most
powerful wizards left in the world and awed them into accepting him
as their chief. And when (the legend continues) the Seers continued to
foretell that not enough had yet been done to prevent the end of the
world and its magic, then (the story goes) Merlin sacriﬁced his life, and
his wizardry, and his time, to lay in force the Interdict of Merlin. It
was not an act without cost, for a place like this one could not be raised

T

*

1341 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y

*
*

*

again by any power still known to wizardkind. Nor yet destroyed, for
those walls of dark stone would pass unharmed, and perhaps unwarmed,
through the heart of a nuclear explosion. It is a pity that nobody knows
how to make them anymore.
In the highest of the rising half-circles of the Wizengamot, on the
topmost level of dark stone, there is a podium. At that podium stands
an old man, with care-lined face and a silver beard that stretches down
below his waist; this is Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore. His
right hand bears a wand of power, upon his shoulder perches a bird of
ﬁre. His left hand holds a short rod, thin and featureless and forged of
the same dark stone as the walls, and this is the Line of Merlin Unbroken,
the device of the Chief Warlock. Karen Dutton bequeathed the Line to
Albus Dumbledore on the last day of her life, scant hours after he returned half-dead from his defeat of Grindelwald with a phoenix ﬂaming
brightly at his side. She in turn received the Line from the perfectionist
Nicodemus Capernaum, each wizard passing it to their chosen successor, back and back in unbroken chain to the day Merlin laid down his
life. That (if you were wondering) is how the country of magical Britain
managed to elect Cornelius Fudge for its Minister, and yet end up with
Albus Dumbledore for its Chief Warlock. Not by law (for written law
can be rewritten) but by most ancient tradition, the Wizengamot does
not choose who shall preside over its follies. Since the day of Merlin’s
sacriﬁce, the most important duty of any Chief Warlock has been to exercise the highest caution in their choice of people who are both good
and able to discern good successors. You would expect that chain of light
to miss a step, sometime down through the centuries; that it would go
astray at least once, and then never return. But it has not. The Line of
Merlin continues, unbroken.
(Or so say those of Dumbledore’s faction. Lord Malfoy would tell
you otherwise. And in Asia they tell other tales entirely, which may not
make Britain’s version wrong.)
Upon the bottommost platform of the Ancient Hall there is a highbacked chair, legged and armed and without cushions, of dark metal
rather than dark stone, which Merlin did not place there.
The Ministry building that grew up around this place is wood* 1342 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS II: THE HORNS EFFECT

*
*

*

paneled and gold-washed, bright and ﬁre-lit, ﬁlled with bustling foolishness. This place is diﬀerent. It is the stone heart of magical Britain, and
it is neither gold-washed nor wood-paneled, neither ﬁre-lit nor bright.
Filing solemnly into this room are witches and wizards in plumcolored robes each embroidered with a silver W. They carry themselves
with an air of seriousness showing that they are well aware that they
are terribly, terribly important. They are meeting in the Most Ancient
Hall, after all. They are the Lords and Ladies of the Wizengamot, and
they consider themselves the greatest folk of the world’s greatest magical
country. Lesser folk have fallen before them on bended knee in supplication; they are powerful, they are wealthy, they are noble; are they not
great?
Albus Dumbledore knows everyone in this room by name. He has
taught many of them, though too few have learned. Some are his allies,
some his opponents, the rest he courts within the careful dance of their
neutrality. All of them, to him, are people.
The current Defense Professor of Hogwarts, if you asked him for his
opinion of the Lords and Ladies, would say that while many of them are
ambitious, few have any ambition. He would observe that the Wizengamot is exactly where someone like that would end up—that it is exactly
the sort of opportunity you would grasp, if you had nothing better to
do. Such folk are rarely interesting, but they are often useful; pieces to
be manipulated, points to be scored, by the true players of the game.
Not among the rising half-circles, but oﬀ to one side among a raised
arc for the spectators, next to a witch in pointed hat whose face is lined
with apprehension, there sits a boy dressed in the most formal black
robes that he owns. His eyes are green ice and abstraction, and he hardly
glances at the Lords and Ladies as they bustle in. To him they are just
a collection of murmuring plum-colored robes to decorate the wooden
benches, visual background for the scene of the Most Ancient Hall. If
there is an enemy here, or something to be manipulated, it is merely
“the Wizengamot”. The wealthy elites of magical Britain have collective
force, but not individual agency; their goals are too alien and trivial for
them to have personal roles in the tale. As of now, this present time,
the boy neither likes nor dislikes the plum-colored robes, because his
* 1343 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y

*
*

*

brain does not assign them enough agenthood to be the subjects of moral
judgment. He is a PC, and they are wallpaper.
This view is about to change.

**
*
Harry gazed unseeing around the hall of the Wizengamot; it looked quite
old and historic and there was no doubt that Hermione could have lectured him about the place for hours on end. The plum-colored robes
had stopped arriving, and Harry’s pocketwatch, advancing at the rate of
three minutes every half-hour, said that the trial was almost due to start.
Professor McGonagall was sitting beside him, and her eyes never left
him for more than twenty consecutive seconds.
Harry had read the Daily Prophet that morning. The headline had
been “Mad Muggleborn Tries to End Ancient Line” and the rest of the
paper had been the same. When Harry was nine years old the ira had
blown up a British barracks, and he’d watched on tv as all the politicians contested to see who could be the most loudly outraged. And the
thought had occurred to Harry—even then, before he’d known much
about psychology—that it looked like everyone was competing to see
who could be most angry, and nobody would’ve been allowed to suggest
that anyone was being too angry, even if they’d just proposed the saturation nuclear bombing of Ireland. He’d been struck, even then, by an
essential emptiness in the indignation of politicians—though he hadn’t
had the words to describe it, at that age—a sense that they were trying
to score cheap points by hitting at the same safe target as everyone else.
Harry had always possessed that sense of hollowness about political
indignation, but it was strange how very much more obvious it seemed,
when you were reading a dozen articles in the Daily Prophet beating on
Hermione Granger.
The leading article, written by some name that Harry didn’t recognize, had called for the minimum age for Azkaban to be lowered, just
so that the twisted mudblood who had defaced the honor of Scotland
with her savage, unprovoked attack upon the last heir of a Most Ancient
* 1344 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS II: THE HORNS EFFECT

*
*

*

House within the sacred refuge of Hogwarts could be sent to the Dementors that were the only punishment commensurate with the severity of her unspeakable crime. Only this would be enough to discourage any other foreign, subhuman brutes who similarly believed in their
twisted insanity that they could evade the majesty of the Wizengamot’s
inevitable and merciless scourging of all that threatened the honorable
nobility of etcetera etcetera etcetera.
The next article had said the same thing in less eloquent words.
Earlier, Albus Dumbledore had told him,
“I will not try to keep you from this trial.” The old wizard’s voice quiet
and unyielding. “I can well foresee how that would go. But I would have
you treat me with equal courtesy in return. The politics of the Wizengamot
are delicate, and of them you know nothing. Dare any folly and it shall be
to Hermione Granger’s cost; and you will remember that folly for the rest of
your days, Harry James Potter-Evans-Verres.”
“I understand,” Harry said. “I know. Just—if you’re planning to pull a
rabbit out of your hat and save the day at the last minute when everything
seems lost, please tell me now instead of letting me sit and worry—”
“I would not do that to you,” the old wizard said, a terrible weariness
seeming to suﬀuse him as he turned to go. “Still less to Hermione. But I have
no rabbits in my hat, Harry. We can only see what Lucius Malfoy wants.”
There was a small sharp rap, a single brief sound that somehow silenced the entire room and caused Harry’s head to jerk around and upward. High above, Dumbledore had just tapped his podium with the
dark rod he held in his left hand.
“The ninetieth session of the two-hundred-and-eighth Wizengamot
is convened at the request of Lord Lucius Malfoy,” the old wizard said
tonelessly.
At once, far to the side of the podium but also in the highest circle,
rose a tall man with a mane of long white spilling down from his head
over the shoulders of his plum-colored robes. “I present a witness for
questioning under Veritaserum,” Lucius Malfoy said, his cool tone clear
throughout the room, smoothly controlled with only a slight undertone
of righteous fury. “Let Hermione, the ﬁrst Granger, be brought forth.”
“I ask you all to remember that she is a ﬁrst-year of Hogwarts,” Dum* 1345 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y

*
*

*

bledore said. “I will brook no abuse of this witness—”
Someone in the benches quite audibly said “Pfah!” and there was a
spread of disgusted snorts, even one or two jeers.
Harry stared at the plum-colored robes, his eyes narrowing.
And with the growing anger came something else, a rising sense of
disquiet, of something horribly skewed, like reality itself was being disrupted. Harry knew that, somehow, but he couldn’t ﬁgure out what
was awry, or why his mind thought it was getting worse...
“Order!” Dumbledore bellowed. He rapped the stone rod twice
against the podium, producing two more small clicks that overrode all
noise. “I will have order here!”
The door through which the witness was brought forth was set directly beneath Harry’s own seat, so it wasn’t until the entire group had
emerged fully into the stone hall that Harry saw—
—an Auror trio—
—Hermione’s back was to Harry as she was brought out, he couldn’t
see her face—
—followed by a shining silver sparrow and a running moonlit squirrel—
—and the source of the horrible wrongness, half-hidden beneath a
tattered cloak.
Harry shot to his feet before he could even think, it was only Professor McGonagall’s sudden frantic grab on his wrist that stopped his
hand going for his wand; and the Transﬁguration Professor whispered
desperately, “Harry it’s all right there’s a Patronus—”
It took a few seconds for Harry to remember himself. For the part
of himself that understood that Hermione hadn’t been directly exposed
to a Dementor, to argue his other parts into something like sanity—
But animal Patronuses aren’t perfect, said another voice inside his
mind. Or Dumbledore wouldn’t see the form of a naked man painful to
look upon. You felt it approaching, animal Patronus or no...
Slowly, Harry Potter sat back down again as Professor McGonagall
pulled down with her grip on his wrist.
But by then he’d already declared war on the country of magical
Britain, and the idea of other people calling him a Dark Lord no longer
* 1346 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS II: THE HORNS EFFECT

*
*

*

seemed important one way or another.
Hermione’s face became visible to him, as she sat down in the chair.
She wasn’t upright and deﬁant like she’d been in front of Snape, she
wasn’t crying like she’d been when the Aurors arrested her. She just sat
there with a look of vacant horror as dark metal chains snaked out from
the chair and bound her arms and legs.
Harry couldn’t take it. Without even thinking he was trying to ﬂee
inside himself, ﬂee into his dark side, pull the cold rage over himself like
a shield. It took too long, he hadn’t tried to go fully into his dark side
since Azkaban. And then when his blood was something like cold, he
looked up again, and saw Hermione in the chair again, and discovered
that his dark side knew nothing about how to deal with this type of
pain, it pierced through the coldness like a knife and didn’t hurt less in
the slightest.
“Why, if it isn’t Harry Potter!” came a high, light female voice, sickly
sweet and indulgent.
Slowly, Harry turned his head away from the chair and saw a smiling
woman wearing so much makeup that her skin looked almost pink, sitting next to a man that Harry recognized from photographs as Minister
Cornelius Fudge.
“Did you have something to say, Mr. Potter?” inquired the woman,
as cheerfully as if this wasn’t a trial.
Other people were also looking at him now.
Harry couldn’t speak, all the words in his mind would have been
stupid to speak aloud. He couldn’t ﬁnd anything to say that Neville
could also have said. Dumbledore had warned Harry that if anyone else
wanted the Boy-Who-Lived to speak, he must pretend to be his age—
“The Headmaster said I shouldn’t ought to talk,” the boy said, not
quite able to keep the edge out of his voice.
“Oh, but you have our permission to talk!” the woman said brightly.
“I’m sure the Wizengamot is always happy to hear from the Boy-WhoLived!” Beside her, Minister Cornelius Fudge was nodding.
The woman’s face was puﬀy and overweight, visibly pale beneath
the makeup. Almost inevitably, a certain word came to mind, and that
word was toad. Which, said Harry’s logical part, shouldn’t correlate to
* 1347 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y

*
*

*

morality in any way. Only in Disney movies were ugly people more
likely to be evil and vice versa; and those movies were probably scripted
by writers who’d never been ugly. He’d give her a chance, everyone in
this room deserved one chance...
“Because I got rid of the Dark Lord?” the boy said, and pointed at
the Dementor where it was hovering behind Hermione’s chair. “There’s
something in this room that’s Darker.”
The woman’s face narrowed, growing a little stern. “I realize a young
boy like yourself may be scared by them, Mr. Potter, but the Dementors
are quite obedient to the Ministry of Magic. And they would, of course,
be necessary to guard—”
“A twelve-year-old girl?” the boy yelled. “Those are the Darkest creatures in the whole world, I could feel it coming here even through the
Patronus—the wrongness coming nearer—it’s horribly evil and it—it’d
eat everyone in this room, if it could! It shouldn’t be let near any child,
ever! Not me, not her, not anyone! You ought to vote to send it away!”
“We’ll certainly have no such vote—” the toad-woman snapped.
“That’s enough, Madam Umbridge, Mr. Potter,” came Dumbledore’s stern voice from high above. And then after a short pause, the
old wizard went on, “Although, of course, the boy is correct on every
count.”
Some of the members of the Wizengamot were looking abashed at
the Boy-Who-Lived’s admonition, and a few others were nodding violently to the old wizard’s words. But they were too few. Harry could
see it. They were too few.
The Veritaserum was brought in then, and Hermione looked for a
brief moment like she was about to sob, she was looking at Harry—
no, at Professor McGonagall—and Professor McGonagall was mouthing
words that Harry couldn’t make out from his angle. Then Hermione
swallowed three drops of Veritaserum and her face grew slack.
“Gawain Robards,” said the smooth voice of Lucius Malfoy. “Your
probity is known to all of us. If you would do the honors?”
One of the three Aurors stepped forward.
After the ﬁrst few questions Harry looked away and stared oﬀ to
one side with his ﬁngers in his ears, as Hermione’s brain played back
* 1348 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS II: THE HORNS EFFECT

*
*

*

the contents of the False Memory Charm. He couldn’t handle the drugdulled anguish in Hermione’s voice as she recounted the false memories,
and his dark side couldn’t handle it either, and he’d already heard the
contents summarized.
Harry’s mind ﬂashed back to another day of horror, and even though
Harry had been on the verge of writing oﬀ Lord Voldemort’s continued
existence as the senility of an old wizard, it suddenly seemed horribly
and uniquely plausible that the entity who’d Memory-Charmed Hermione was the very same mind that had—made use of —Bellatrix Black.
The two events had a certain signature in common. To choose that this
should happen, plan for this to happen—it would take more than evil, it
would take emptiness.
Harry looked up for a moment, then, and saw that the plum-colored
robes were watching, just watching.
Some time later, after all the stars in the night sky had gone cold and
dark and the last light in the Universe had sputtered down to embers and
gone black, the questioning of Hermione ended.
“If it pleases my Lords,” said the voice of Lord Malfoy, “I should like
to have the testimony of my son Draco, witnessed under two drops of
Veritaserum, read aloud at this time.”
Until she went after me in that battle, I wasn’t plotting anything against
Granger. But after that day I really was feeling insulted, I’d helped her all
those times—
The sound that came from Hermione’s throat was like she’d just been
crushed under a falling stone, so huge that she couldn’t cry or breathe,
just a small sad gasp.
“Pardon me,” said one witch from what seemed to be the Malfoyaligned side of the room. “But Lord Malfoy, why would your son help
this mudblood girl?”
“My son,” Lucius Malfoy said in a heavy voice, “seems to have been
listening to certain misguided ideas. He is young—and he has learned,
now, we have all seen as a country, what such folly brings in repayment.”
A few steps down along the visitor’s benches, a man wearing a newsman’s cap and a badge identifying him as belonging to the Daily Prophet
was avidly scribbling with a long quill.
* 1349 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y

*
*

*

The few people who’d nodded along to Dumbledore earlier had
rather sick looks on their faces. One witch in plum-colored robes quite
deliberately stood up from what had seemed like Dumbledore’s side of
the room, and made her way over toward the Malfoy side.
The Auror went on reading, his voice monotone.
I’d been so tired from casting all those locking wards, I was weak when I
cast the last one. I thought I was stronger than Granger but I wasn’t certain,
so I tested it empirically by challenging her to a duel, that’s why I d-d-did it
and also because if I’d won I was planning to beat her again the next day
where everyone could see. Stupid Veritaserum. But she didn’t know about
that when she tried to kill me! And I really was insulted by what she’d done,
I really had helped her before and I hadn’t been planning anything against
her then, only she went after me in front of everyone!”
When all the witness testimony was done, the deliberations of the
Wizengamot began.
If you could call them that.
It seemed that many members of the Wizengamot were of the strong
opinion that murder was bad.
The plum-colored robes on Dumbledore’s side of the room were
silent, the supposed forces of good saving their political capital for more
winnable battles. And Harry could hear, as though Professor Quirrell
were standing next to him, a dry voice in his mind; explaining to him
that it would hardly have been to the politicians’ own advantage to speak,
just then.
But there was one wizard in the room whose status was high enough
that he had, it seemed, transcended his caution against losing face; one
wizard alone whose status was high enough that he could speak a word
of sanity and escape unscathed. He alone spoke to defend Hermione,
the man with a phoenix ﬂaming bright upon his shoulder.
Only Albus Dumbledore spoke.
The Chief Warlock didn’t raise the possibility that Hermione Granger was entirely innocent. That, the Headmaster had explained to
Harry, would not be believed, would only make it worse.
But Albus Dumbledore said, in one gentle reminder after another,
that the perpetrator was a ﬁrst-year girl in Hogwarts; that many had
* 1350 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS II: THE HORNS EFFECT

*
*

*

done foolish things during their youth; that a ﬁrst-year in Hogwarts
was simply too young to comprehend the consequences of her acts. He
himself (the Chief Warlock said quietly) had attempted certain foolish
things during his childhood, when he was well older than she.
Albus Dumbledore said that Hermione Granger had been beloved
of all the Hogwarts faculty, and helped four Huﬄepuﬀ girls with their
Charms homework, and had scored one hundred and three points for
Ravenclaw over the course of the school year.
Albus Dumbledore said that nobody who knew Hermione Granger would be anything but shocked by these events. That they had, all
of them, heard the horror in her voice as she recounted her testimony.
And if some unusual madness had temporarily possessed her, then—his
voice rising in stern command—she deserved nothing from them except
sympathy and a healer’s attentions.
And at the last, Albus Dumbledore reminded the Wizengamot, over
cries of protest, that the charge was attempted murder and not murder.
Albus Dumbledore said, over a rising storm of objections, that no lasting
harm had come to anyone. And Albus Dumbledore begged them not to
do worse themselves than anything that had yet been done—
“Enough!” bellowed Lucius Malfoy, and a show of hands ended the
deliberations. The white-maned man stood tall and terrible, his silver
cane held high in one hand like a gavel about to fall. “For what this mad
woman has tried to do to my son—for the blood debt that she owes for
trying to end the line of a Noble and Most Ancient House—I say that
she will—”
“Azkaban!” roared a man with a scarred face, seated at Lord Malfoy’s
right hand. “Send the mad mudblood to Azkaban!”
“Azkaban!” cried another plum-colored robe, and then another, and
another—
A click from the rod in Dumbledore’s hand silenced the room. “You
are out of order,” the old wizard said sternly. “And your proposal is
barbaric, beneath the dignity of this assembly. There are things we do
not do. Lord Malfoy?”
Lucius Malfoy had listened to this with an impassive face. “Well,”
Lord Malfoy said after a few moments. A cold gleam lit his eyes. “I had
*

1351 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y

*
*

*

not planned to ask it. But if that is the will of the Wizengamot—then let
her pay as any in her place would pay. Let it be Azkaban.”
A great cheer of rage went up—
“Are you all lost?” cried Albus Dumbledore. “She is too young! Her
mind would not withstand it! Not in three centuries has such a thing
been done in Britain!”
“What will the other countries think of us?” said the sharp voice of
a woman that Harry recognized as Neville’s grandmother.
“Will you guard Azkaban after she goes there, Lord Malfoy?” said a
stern old witch that Harry didn’t know. “For my Aurors may decline
to guard it, I fear, if small children are kept within.”
“The deliberations are ended,” Lucius Malfoy said coldly. “But if
you are incapable of ﬁnding Aurors who can obey the vote of the Wizengamot, Madam Bones, you may relinquish the position; we can easily
ﬁnd another to serve in your place. The will of this Hall is clear. For the
monstrosity of her crimes, the girl is to be tried as an adult and punished
accordingly; ten years in Azkaban, the justice for attempted murder.”
When the old wizard spoke again, his voice was lower. “Is there no
alternative to this, Lucius? We may retire to my chambers to discuss it,
if need be.”
The tall man of the long white hair turned, then, to regard where the
old wizard stood at the podium; and the two stared at each other for a
long moment.
When Lucius Malfoy spoke again his voice seemed to tremble ever
so slightly, as though the stern control on it was failing. “Blood calls
for repayment, the blood of my family. Not for any price will I sell the
blood debt owed my son. You would not understand that, who never
had love or child of your own. Still, there is more than one debt owed
to House Malfoy, and I think that my son, if he stood among us, would
rather be repaid for his mother’s blood than for his own. Confess your
own crime to the Wizengamot, as you confessed it to me, and I shall—”
“Don’t even think about it, Albus,” said the stern old witch who had
spoken before.
The old wizard stood at the podium.
The old wizard stood at the podium, his face twisting, untwisting—
*

1352 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS II: THE HORNS EFFECT

*
*

*

“Stop it,” said the old witch. “You know the answer you must give,
Albus. It will not change for agonizing over it.”
The old wizard spoke.
“No,” said Albus Dumbledore.
“And you, Malfoy,” continued the stern old witch, “I suppose all you
really wanted this whole time was to ruin—”
“Hardly,” said Lucius Malfoy, his lips now twisting into a bitter
smile. “No, I have no purpose here but my son’s vengeance. I only
wished to show the Wizengamot the truth behind this old man’s pretended heroism and his praise of that girl—that he would hardly think
of sacriﬁcing himself to save her.”
“Cruelty worthy of a Death Eater indeed,” said Augusta Longbottom. “Not that I’m implying anything, of course.”
“Cruelty?” said Lucius Malfoy, the bitter smile still on his face. “I
think not. I knew what his answer would be. I have ever warned you
that he only plays his pretended part. If you believe in his hesitation,
the more fool you. Remember that his answer was the same.” The man
raised his voice. “Let us vote, my friends. I think a show of hands will
suﬃce for it. I do not imagine there will be many who choose to align
themselves with murderers.” The voice went cold, on the last note, the
promise in it very clear.
“Look at the girl,” said Albus Dumbledore. “See her, see the horror
you are committing! She is—” The old wizard’s voice broke. “She is
afraid—”
The Veritaserum must have been wearing oﬀ, because Hermione
Granger’s face was twisting beneath the slackness, her limbs trembling
visibly beneath the chains, as though she were trying to run, run from
that chair, but was pressed down by weights larger than the enchanted
metal links that bound her. Then there was a convulsive eﬀort and Hermione’s neck moved, her head twisted, enough to bring her eyes into
line—
She looked at Harry Potter and though she didn’t speak, it was absolutely clear what she was saying.
Harry
help me
* 1353 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y

*
*

*

please—
And in the Most Ancient Hall of the Wizengamot an icy voice rang
out, speech the color of liquid nitrogen, pitched too high for that it came
from too young a throat, and that voice said, “Lucius Malfoy.”

**
*
In the ancient and hallowed halls of the Wizengamot, people looked
around and it took their eyes too long to ﬁnd what they sought. It might
have been high in pitch, it might have been under-loud for the words
being spoken; and yet even so, you wouldn’t have expected to hear that
voice from a child.
It wasn’t until Lord Malfoy spoke in return that people even realized
where they should be looking.
“Harry Potter,” said Lucius Malfoy. He did not incline his head.
Heads spun, eyes moved, and people focused on the messy-haired
young boy standing near the weeping older witch. The boy stood merely
chest-high with his shoes on, dressed in short robes of formal black.
Though unless your eyes were keen indeed, you couldn’t have seen, from
all the way across the Hall, that famous and deadly scar beneath his messy
hair.
“This folly does not become you, Lucius,” said the boy. “Twelve-yearold girls do not go around committing murders. You are a Slytherin
and an intelligent one. You know this is a plot. Hermione Granger
was placed on this gameboard by force, by whatever hand lies behind
that plot. You were surely intended to act just as you are acting now—
except that Draco Malfoy was meant to be dead, and you were meant
to be beyond all reason. But he is alive and you are sane. Why are you
cooperating with your intended role, in a plot meant to take the life of
your son?”
A storm seemed to be raging inside Lucius, the face beneath the ﬂowing white hair threatening to crack open and spill something unguessable. The Lord of Malfoy seemed to almost speak once and then twice
again, swallowing three unheard sentences before his lips parted for true.
* 1354 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS II: THE HORNS EFFECT

*
*

*

“A plot, you say?” Lord Malfoy said at last. His face was twitching,
hardly controlled. “And whose plot would that be, then?”
“If I knew,” said the boy, “I would have said so a good deal earlier. But
anyone who had ever been Hermione Granger’s classmate could tell you
that she is a most unlikely murderess. She does, in fact, help Huﬄepuﬀs
with their homework. This was not a natural event, Lord Malfoy.”
“Plot—or no plot—” Lucius’s voice was trembling. “This mudblood
ﬁlth has touched my son and for that I will end her. You should know
that full well, Harry Potter.”
“It is questionable,” the boy said, “to put it mildly, whether Hermione Granger actually cast that Blood-Cooling Charm. I do not know
the exact circumstances or what spells were involved, but simple trickery would not have suﬃced to make her do it. She did not act of her
own will, and perhaps did not act at all. Your vengeance is being misdirected, Lord Malfoy, and deliberately so. It is not a twelve-year-old girl
who deserves your ire.”
“And what do you care for her fate?” Lucius Malfoy’s voice was rising.
“What is your stake in this?”
“She is my friend,” the boy said, “as Draco is my friend. It is possible
that this blow was aimed at me, and not at House Malfoy at all.”
Again the muscles jumped in Lucius’s face. “And now you are lying
to me—as you lied to my son!”
“Believe it or not,” the boy said quietly, “I never willed anything but
that Draco should know the truth—”
“Enough!” cried the Lord Malfoy. “Enough of your lies! Enough of
your games! You do not understand—you would never understand—
what it means that he is my son! I will not be denied this vengeance!
No more! Never again! For the blood this girl owes House Malfoy, she
shall go to Azkaban. And if I ever ﬁnd another hand at work—even if
it is your own—that hand shall be cut oﬀ as well!” Lucius Malfoy raised
his deadly silver cane as though in command, his teeth clenched and his
lips drawn back in a snarl, like a wolf facing a dragon. “And if you have
nothing better to say than that—be silent, Harry Potter!”

**
*
* 1355 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y

*
*

*

Harry’s blood was hammering even beneath the ice of his dark side, the
fear for Hermione, the part of him that wanted to lash out at Lucius
and destroy him where he stood for his insolence and his stupidity–but
Harry didn’t have the power, he didn’t even have a single vote in the
Wizengamot—
Draco had said that Lucius was scared of him, for some unknown
reason. And Harry could see it in the rictus that Lord Malfoy’s face had
become, drawn and tight, that it was taking all his courage for him to
tell Harry to shut up.
So Harry said, his voice cool and deadly, hoping to hell that it meant
something, “You will earn my enmity if you do this thing, Lucius...”
Someone in the lower rows of what was evidently the blood-purist
side of the Wizengamot, who was looking down at the young boy rather
than up at Lord Malfoy, laughed in outright incredulity. Other plumcolored robes began to laugh as well.
Lord Malfoy gazed at him with hard dignity, as that laughter spread.
“If you want the enmity of the House of Malfoy, you shall have it, child.”
“Now really,” said the woman in too much pink makeup, “I think
this has gone on quite long enough, wouldn’t you say, Lord Malfoy? The
boy will miss his classes.”
“Indeed he will,” said Lucius Malfoy, and then raised his voice again.
“I call the vote! By show of hands, let the Wizengamot acknowledge the
blood debt owed to the Noble and Most Ancient House of Malfoy, for
the attempted murder of its last scion and ending of its line, by Hermione, the ﬁrst Granger!”
Hands shot up one after another, and the secretary who sat in the
bottom circle began to make marks on parchment to tally them, but it
was obvious which way the majority had gone.
And Harry screamed inside his mind, a frantic call for help to any
part of himself that would oﬀer a way out, a strategy, an idea. But there
was nothing, there was nothing, he’d played his last cards and lost. And
then with a last convulsive desperation Harry plunged himself into his
dark side, pushed himself into his dark side, seizing at its deadly clarity,

* 1356 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS II: THE HORNS EFFECT

*
*

*

oﬀering his dark side anything if it would only solve this problem for
him; and at last the lethal calm came over him, the true ice ﬁnally answering his call. Beyond all panic and despair his mind began to search
through every fact in its possession, recall everything it knew about Lucius Malfoy, about the Wizengamot, about the laws of magical Britain;
his eyes looked at the rows of chairs, at every person and every thing
within range of his vision, searching for any opportunity it could grasp—

*

1357 *

CHAPTER

EIGHT Y-ONE

TABOO TRADEOFFS,
PART III
n rising half-circles of dark stone, a great sea of upraised hands.
The Lords and Ladies of the Wizengamot, in plum-colored robes
marked with a silver ‘W’, stared down in stern rebuke at a young
girl trembling in chains. If they had, in any particular ethical system,
damned themselves, they clearly thought quite highly of themselves for
having done so.
Harry’s breath was trembling in his chest. His dark side had come
up with a plan—and then rotated itself back out again because speaking
too icily would not be to Hermione’s advantage; a fact which the onlyhalf-cold Harry had somehow not realized...
“The vote carries, in favor,” intoned the secretary, when all the tallying was done, and the upraised hands fell back down. “The Wizengamot
recognizes the blood debt owed by Hermione Granger to House Malfoy
for the attempted murder of its scion and ending of its line.”
Lucius Malfoy was smiling in grim satisfaction. “And now,” said the
white-maned wizard, “I say that her debt shall be paid—”
Harry clenched his ﬁsts beneath the bench and shouted, “By the debt
owed from House Malfoy to House Potter!”
“Silence!” snapped the woman in too much pink makeup sitting next
to Minister Fudge. “You’ve disrupted these proceedings quite enough
already! Aurors, escort him out!”
“Wait,” said Augusta Longbottom from the top tier of seats. “What
debt is this?”

I

* 1359 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-ONE

*
*

*

Lucius’s hands whitened on his cane. “House Malfoy owes no debt
to you!”
It wasn’t the world’s most solid hope, it was based on one newspaper article from a woman who’d been False-Memory-Charmed, but Rita
Skeeter had seemed to ﬁnd it plausible, that Mr. Weasley had allegedly
owed James Potter a debt because...
“I’m surprised you’ve forgotten,” Harry said evenly. “Surely it was a
cruel and painful period of your life, laboring under the Imperius curse
of He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named, until you were freed of it by the efforts of House Potter. By my mother, Lily Potter, who died for it, and
by my father, James Potter, who died for it, and by me, of course.”
There was a brief silence within the Most Ancient Hall.
“Why, what an excellent point, Mr. Potter,” said the old witch who’d
been identiﬁed as Madam Bones. “I, too, am quite surprised that Lord
Malfoy would forget such a signiﬁcant event. It must have been such a
happy day for him.”
“Yes,” said Augusta Longbottom. “He must have been so grateful.”
Madam Bones nodded. “House Malfoy could not possibly deny that
debt—unless, perhaps, Lord Malfoy is to tell us that he has misremembered something? I should take quite a professional interest in that. We
are always trying to improve our picture of those dark days.”
Lucius Malfoy’s hands gripped the silver snake-handle of his cane like
he was about to strike with it, unleash whatever power it kept—
Then the Lord Malfoy seemed to relax, and a chill smile came over
his face. “Of course,” he said easily. “I do confess I had not understood,
but the child is quite correct. But I do not quite think the two debts
cancel—House Potter was only trying to save itself, after all—”
“Not so,” Dumbledore said from above.
“—and therefore,” intoned Lucius Malfoy, “I demand monetary compensation as well, for the redemption of the blood debt owed my son.
That, too, is the law.”
Harry felt a strange inward ﬂinch. That had also been in the newspaper article, Mr. Weasley had demanded an additional ten thousand
Galleons—
“How much?” said the Boy-Who-Lived.
* 1360 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS III

*
*

*

Lucius was still wearing the cold smile. “One hundred thousand
Galleons. If you have not that much in your vault, I suppose I must
accept a promissory note for the remainder.”
A roar of protest went up from Dumbledore’s side of the room, even
some of the plum-colored robes in the middle looked shocked.
“Shall we put it to vote of the Wizengamot?” said Lucius Malfoy.
“I think few of us would like to see the little murderess go free. By a
show of hands, that additional compensation of one hundred thousand
Galleons would be required to cancel the debt!”
The clerk began tallying, but that vote was also clear.
Harry stood there, breathing deeply.
You’d better not even have to think about this, Harry’s inner Gryﬃndor said threateningly.
It’s a major purchase, observed Ravenclaw. We ought to spend a lot of
time thinking about it.
It shouldn’t have been hard. It shouldn’t have. Two million pounds
was only money, and money was only worth what it could buy...
It was strange how much psychological attachment you could have to
‘only money’, or how painful it could be to imagine losing a bank vault
full of gold that you hadn’t even imagined existed just one year earlier.
Kimball Kinnison wouldn’t hesitate, said Gryﬃndor. Seriously. Like,
snap decision. What sort of hero are you? I already hate you just for having
to think about it for longer than 50 milliseconds.
This is real life, said Ravenclaw. Losing all your money is a lot more
painful for real people in real life than in heroic books.
What? demanded Gryﬃndor. Whose side are you on?
I wasn’t advocating for a particular answer, said Ravenclaw, I was just
saying it because it was true.
Could a hundred thousand Galleons be used to save more than one life
if spent some other way? said Slytherin. We have research to do, battles to
ﬁght, the diﬀerence between being 40,000 Galleons rich and being 60,000
Galleons in debt is not trivial—
So we’ll just use one of our ways to make money fast and earn it all back,
said Huﬄepuﬀ.
It’s not certain those will work, said Slytherin, and a lot of them require
*

1361 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-ONE

*
*

*

starting cash—
Personally, said Gryﬃndor, I vote that we save Hermione and then gang
up and kill our inner Slytherin.
The clerk’s voice said that the tally had been recorded and the vote
had passed...
Harry’s lips opened.
“I accept your oﬀer,” said Harry’s lips, without any hesitation, without any decision having been made; just as if the internal debate had
been pretense and illusion, the true controller of the voice having been
no part of it.
It was clear that Lucius Malfoy had not been expecting that reply.
The Lord Malfoy’s mask of calm shattered, his eyes widened, he
stared at Harry in sheer blank astonishment. His mouth had opened
slightly, though he wasn’t speaking, and if he was making any peculiar
noises it couldn’t be heard over the roar of simultaneous gasps from the
Wizengamot—
A tap of stone silenced the crowd.
“No,” said the voice of Dumbledore.
Harry’s head jerked around to stare at the ancient wizard.
Dumbledore’s lined face was pale, the silver beard was visibly trembling, he looked like he was in the ﬁnal throes of a terminal illness.
“I’m—sorry, Harry—but this choice is not yours—for I am still the
guardian of your vault.”
“What?” said Harry, too shocked to compose his reply.
“I cannot let you go into debt to Lucius Malfoy, Harry! I cannot!
You do not know—you do not realize—”
Die.
Harry didn’t even know which part of himself had spoken, it might
have been a unanimous vote, the pure rage and fury pouring through
him. For an instant he thought that the sheer force of the anger might
take magical wing and ﬂy out to strike the Headmaster, send him tumbling back dead from the podium—
But when that mental voice had spoken, the old wizard was still
standing there, gazing at Harry, long dark wand in his right hand, short
black rod in his left.
* 1362 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS III

*
*

*

And Harry’s eyes also went to the red-golden bird with its claws
resting on the shoulder of Dumbledore’s black robes, silent when no
phoenix should have been silent. “Fawkes,” Harry said, his voice sounding strange in his own ears, “can you scream at him for me?”
The ﬁery bird on the old wizard’s shoulder didn’t scream. Maybe the
Wizengamot had demanded that a spell of silence be put on the creature,
otherwise it probably would have been screaming the whole time. But
Fawkes hit his master, one golden wing buﬀeting the old wizard’s head.
“I cannot, Harry!” the old wizard said, the agony clear in his voice.
“I am doing as I must do!”
And Harry knew, then, as he looked at the red-golden bird, what he
had to do as well. It should have been obvious from the beginning, that
solution.
“Then I too will do what I must,” Harry said up to Dumbledore, as
though the two of them stood alone in the room. “You do realize that,
don’t you?”
The old wizard shook his trembling head. “You will change your
mind when you are older—”
“I’m not talking about that,” Harry said, his voice still strange in his
own ears. “I mean that I will not allow Hermione Granger to be eaten
by Dementors under any circumstances. Period. Regardless of what any
law says, and no matter what I have to do to stop it. Do I still need to
spell it out?”
A strange male voice spoke from somewhere far away, “Be sure that
the girl is taken directly to Azkaban, and put under extra guard.”
Harry waited, staring at the old wizard, and then spoke again. “I will
go to Azkaban,” Harry said to the old wizard, as though they stood alone
in the world, “before Hermione can be taken there, and start snapping
my ﬁngers. It may cost me my life, but by the time she gets there, there
won’t be an Azkaban anymore.”
Some members of the Wizengamot gasped in surprise.
Then a greater number started laughing.
“How would you even get there, little boy?” someone said, from
among those who were laughing.
“I have my ways of going places,” said the boy’s distant voice. Harry
* 1363 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-ONE

*
*

*

kept his eyes on Dumbledore, on the old wizard staring at him in shock.
Harry didn’t look directly at Fawkes, didn’t give his plan away; but in his
mind he prepared to summon the phoenix to transport him, prepared
to ﬁll his mind with light and fury, to call for the ﬁre-bird with all his
might, he might have to do it upon the instant if Dumbledore pointed
his wand—
“Would you truly?” the old wizard said to Harry, also as if the two
of them stood alone in the room.
The room went silent again as everyone stared in shock at the Chief
Warlock of the Wizengamot, who seemed to be taking the mad threat
completely seriously.
The old wizard’s eyes were locked only on Harry. “Would you risk
everything—everything—only for her?”
“Yes,” Harry said back in reply.
That’s the wrong answer, you know, said Slytherin. Seriously.
But it’s the true answer.
“You will not see reason?” said the old wizard.
“Apparently not,” Harry said back.
The gazes stayed locked.
“This is terrible folly,” said the old wizard.
“I am aware of this,” answered the hero. “Now get out of my way.”
Strange light glinted in the ancient blue eyes. “As you will, Harry
Potter, but know that this is not over.”
The rest of the world faded back into existence.
“I withdraw my objection,” said the old wizard, “Harry Potter may
do as he wishes,” and the Wizengamot exploded in a roar of shock, only
to be silenced by a ﬁnal tap of the stone rod.
Harry turned his head back to look at Lord Malfoy, who looked like
he’d seen a cat turn into a person and start eating other cats. To call the
look confused did not begin to describe it.
“You would truly...” Lucius Malfoy said slowly. “You would truly
pay a hundred thousand Galleons, to save one mudblood girl.”
“I think there’s about forty thousand in my Gringotts vault,” Harry
said. It was strange how that was still causing more internal pain than
the thought of taking an over-ﬁfty-percent risk to his life to destroy Azk* 1364 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS III

*
*

*

aban. “As for the other sixty thousand—what are the rules, exactly?”
“It comes due when you graduate Hogwarts,” the old wizard said
from high above. “But Lord Malfoy has certain rights over you before
then, I fear.”
Lucius Malfoy stood motionless, frowning down at Harry. “Who is
she to you, then? What is she to you, that you would pay so much to
keep her from harm?”
“My friend,” the boy said quietly.
Lucius Malfoy’s eyes narrowed. “By the report I received, you cannot
cast the Patronus Charm, and Dumbledore knows this. The power of
a single Dementor nearly killed you. You would not dare venture near
Azkaban in your own person—”
“That was in January,” said Harry. “This is April.”
Lucius Malfoy’s eyes remained cool and calculating. “You pretend
you can destroy Azkaban, and Dumbledore pretends to believe it.”
Harry did not reply.
The white-haired man turned slightly, toward the center of the halfcircle, as though to address the greater Wizengamot. “I withdraw my
oﬀer!” shouted the Lord of Malfoy. “I will not accept the debt to House
Potter in payment, not even for a hundred thousand Galleons! The girl’s
blood debt to House Malfoy stands!”
Again the roar of many voices. “Dishonorable!” someone cried.
“You acknowledge the debt to House Potter, and yet you would—” and
then that voice cut oﬀ.
“I acknowledge the debt, but the law does not strictly oblige me to
accept it in cancellation,” said Lord Malfoy with a grim smile. “The girl
is no part of House Potter; the debt I owe House Potter is no debt to her.
As for the dishonor—” Lucius Malfoy paused. “As for the grave shame
I feel at my ingratitude toward the Potters, who have done so much for
me—” Lucius Malfoy bowed his head. “May my ancestors forgive me.”
“Well, boy?” called the scarred man sitting at Lord Malfoy’s right
hand. “Go and destroy Azkaban, then!”
“I’d like to see that,” said another voice. “Will you be selling tickets?”
It went without saying that Harry didn’t pick this particular moment
to give up.
* 1365 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-ONE

*
*

*

The girl is no part of House Potter—
He had, in fact, seen the obvious way out of the dilemma almost
instantly.
It might have taken him longer if he hadn’t recently overheard a number of conversations between older Ravenclaw girls, and read a certain
number of Quibbler stories.
He was, nonetheless, having trouble accepting it.
This is ridiculous, said a part of Harry which had just dubbed itself the
Internal Consistency Checker. Our actions here are completely incoherent.
First you feel less emotional reluctance to risk your bloody Life and probably
Die for Hermione, than to part with a stupid heap of gold. And now you’re
balking just at getting married?
System Error.
You know what? said Internal Consistency Checker. You’re stupid.
I didn’t say no, thought Harry. I was just saying System Error.
I vote for destroying Azkaban, said Gryﬃndor. It needs to be done
anyway.
Really, really stupid, said Internal Consistency Checker. Oh, screw
this, I’m assuming control of our body.
The boy took a deep breath, and opened his mouth—
By this point Harry Potter had entirely forgotten the existence of
Professor McGonagall, who had been sitting there this whole time undergoing a number of interesting changes of facial expression which
Harry had not been looking at because he was distracted. It would have
been overly harsh to say that Harry had forgotten her because he did
not consider her a PC. It could be more kindly said that Professor McGonagall was not visibly a solution to any of his current problems, and
therefore she was not part of the universe.
So Harry, who at this point had a fair amount of adrenaline in his
bloodstream, startled and jumped quite visibly when Professor McGonagall, her eyes now blazing with impossible hope and the tears on her
cheek half-dried, leapt to her feet and cried, “With me, Mr. Potter!” and,
without waiting for a reply, tore down the stairs that led to the bottom
platform where waited a chair of dark metal.
It took a moment, but Harry ran after; though it took him longer
* 1366 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS III

*
*

*

to reach the bottom, after Professor McGonagall vaulted half the stairs
with a strange catlike motion and landed with the astonished-looking
Auror trio already pointing their wands at her.
“Miss Granger!” cried Professor McGonagall. “Can you speak yet?”
Much as with Professor McGonagall, there was a certain sense in
which it could be said that Harry had forgotten about the existence of
Hermione Granger, because Harry had been tilting his neck back to
look upward rather than downward, and because he hadn’t considered
her a solution to any of his current problems. Though it was hardly
certain, in fact it wasn’t at all probable, that Harry remembering to look
at Hermione or think about what she must be feeling, would have helped
anything in the slightest.
Harry reached the bottom of the stairs and saw Hermione Granger
full on—
Without thinking, without being able to help himself, Harry shut
his eyes, but he’d seen.
Her school robes around her neck, soaked all the way through with
tears.
The way she’d been looking away from him.
And the eye of memory and sympathy, which could not be shut,
which could not look away, knew that Hermione had recounted the
worst shame of her life in front of the nobility of magical Britain and
Professor McGonagall and Dumbledore and Harry; and then been sentenced to Azkaban where she would be exposed to Dementors until she
went mad and died; and then she’d heard that Harry was going to give
away all his money and go into debt to save her, and maybe even sacriﬁce
his life
and with the Dementor standing only a few paces behind her
she hadn’t said anything...
“Y-yes,” whispered the voice of Hermione Granger. “I c-can talk.”
Harry opened his eyes again and saw her face, now looking at him.
It didn’t say anything like what he thought Hermione was feeling, faces
couldn’t say anything that complicated, all facial muscles could do was
contort themselves into knots.
“H-H-Harry, I-I’m so, I’m so—”
*

1367 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-ONE

*
*

*

“Shut up,” Harry suggested.
“s-s-sorry—”
“If you’d never met me on the train you wouldn’t be in any trouble
right now. So shut up,” said Harry Potter.
“Both of you stop being silly,” Professor McGonagall said in her ﬁrm
Scottish accent (it was strange how much that helped). “Mr. Potter, hold
out your wand so that Miss Granger’s ﬁngers can touch it. Miss Granger,
repeat after me. Upon my life and magic—”
Harry did as he was bid, thrusting his wand forward to touch Hermione’s ﬁngers; and then Hermione’s faltering voice said, “Upon my life
and magic—”
“I swear service to the House of Potter—” said Professor McGonagall.
And Hermione, without waiting for any further instructions, said,
the words spilling out of her in a rush, “I swear service to the House of
Potter, to obey its Master or Mistress, and stand at their right hand, and
ﬁght at their command, and follow where they go, until the day I die.”
All those words had been blurted out in a desperate gasp before
Harry could have thought or said anything, if he’d been mad enough
to interrupt.
“Mr. Potter, repeat these words,” said Professor McGonagall. “I,
Harry, heir and last scion of the Potters, accept your service, until the
end of the world and its magic.”
Harry took a breath and said, “I, Harry, heir and last scion of the
Potters, accept your service, until the end of the world and its magic.”
“That’s it,” said Professor McGonagall. “Well done.”
Harry looked up, and saw that the entire Wizengamot, whose existence he’d forgotten, was staring at them.
And then Minerva McGonagall, who was Head of House Gryﬃndor even if she didn’t always act like it, looked up high above at where
Lucius Malfoy stood; and she said to him before the entire Wizengamot,
“I regret every point I ever gave you in Transﬁguration, you vile little
worm.”
Whatever Lucius was about to say in reply was silenced by a tap of the
short rod in Dumbledore’s hand. “Ahem!” said the old wizard from his
podium of dark stone. “This session has carried on quite considerably,
* 1368 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS III

*
*

*

and if it is not dismissed soon, some of us may miss their entire luncheon.
The law of this matter is clear. You have already voted on the terms of
the bargain, and Lord Malfoy cannot legally decline it. As we have far
exceeded our allotted time, I now, in accordance with the last decision
of the survivors of the eighty-eighth Wizengamot, adjourn this session.”
The old wizard tapped the rod of dark stone three times.
“You fools!” shouted Lucius Malfoy. The white hair was shaking as
though in a wind, the face beneath was pale with fury. “Do you think
you’ll get away with what you’ve done today? Do you think that girl
can try to murder my son and escape unscathed?”
The toad-like pink-makeup woman, whose name Harry could no
longer remember, was standing up from her seat. “Why, of course not,”
she said with a sickening smile. “After all, the girl is still a murderess,
and I think the Ministry shall be watching her aﬀairs quite closely—it
hardly seems wise that she should be allowed to wander the streets, after
all—”
Harry was fed up at this point.
Without waiting to listen, Harry turned on his heel and strode forward in long steps toward—
The horror only he could truly see, the absence of color and space,
the wound in the world, above which ﬂoated a tattered cloak; most
imperfectly guarded by a running moonlit squirrel and ﬂuttering silver
sparrow.
His dark side had also noticed, when it was looking through the entire room for anything that could possibly be used as a weapon, that the
enemy had been foolish enough to bring a Dementor into Harry’s presence. That was a powerful weapon indeed, and one that Harry might
wield better than its supposed masters. There had been a time in Azkaban when Harry had told twelve Dementors to turn and go, and they
had gone.
The Dementors are Death, and the Patronus Charm works by thinking
about happy thoughts instead of Death.
If Harry’s theory was correct, that one sentence would be all it took
to pop the Aurors’ Patronus Charms like a soap bubble, and ensure that
nobody within reach of his voice could cast another one.
* 1369 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-ONE

*
*

*

I am going to cancel the Patronus Charms and prevent any more Patronuses from being cast. And then my Dementor, ﬂying faster than any
broomstick, is going to Kiss everyone here who voted to send a twelve-yearold girl to Azkaban.
Say that, to set up the if-then expectation, and wait for people to
understand and laugh. Then speak the fatal truth; and when the Aurors’
Patronuses winked out to prove the point, either people’s anticipations
of the mindless void, or Harry’s threat of its destruction, would make
the Dementor obey. Those who had sought to compromise with the
darkness would be consumed by it.
It was the other solution his dark side had devised.
Ignoring the gasps rising from behind him, Harry crossed the radius
of the Patronuses, strode to a single pace from Death. Its unhindered
fear burst around him like a whirlpool, like stepping next to the sucking
drain of some huge bathtub emptying out its water; but with the false Patronuses no longer obscuring the level on which they interacted, Harry
could reach the Dementor even as it could reach him. Harry looked
straight into the pulling vacuum and—
the Earth among the stars
all his triumph at saving Hermione
someday the reality of which you are a shadow will cease to exist
Harry took all the silver emotion that fueled his Patronus Charm
and shoved it at the Dementor; and expected Death’s shadow to ﬂee from
him—
—and as Harry did that, he ﬂung his hands up and shouted “BOO!”
The void retreated sharply away from Harry until it came up against
the dark stone behind.
In the hall there was a deathly silence.
Harry turned his back on the empty void, and looked up at where the
toad-woman stood. She was pale beneath the pink makeup, her mouth
opening and closing like a ﬁsh.
“I make you this one oﬀer,” said the Boy-Who-Lived. “I never learn
that you’ve been interfering with me or any of mine. And you never
ﬁnd out why the unkillable soul-eating monster is scared of me. Now
sit down and shut up.”
* 1370 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS III

*
*

*

The toad-woman fell back down to her bench without a word.
Harry looked further up.
“A riddle, Lord Malfoy!” the Boy-Who-Lived shouted across the
Most Ancient Hall. “I know you weren’t in Ravenclaw, but try to answer this one anyway! What destroys Dark Lords, frightens Dementors,
and owes you sixty thousand Galleons?”
For an instant Lord Malfoy stood there with eyes slightly widened;
then his face fell back into calm scorn, and his voice spoke coolly in
reply. “Are you openly threatening me, Mr. Potter?”
“I’m not threatening you,” said the Boy-Who-Lived. “I’m scaring
you. There’s a diﬀerence.”
“Enough, Mr. Potter,” said Professor McGonagall. “We shall be late
for afternoon Transﬁguration as it is. And do come back here, you’re
still terrifying that poor Dementor.” She turned to the Aurors. “Mr.
Kleiner, if you would!”
Harry strode back to them, as the Auror addressed moved forward
and pressed a short rod of dark metal to the dark metal chair, muttering
an inaudible word of dismissal.
The chains slithered back as smoothly as they had come forth; and
Hermione pushed herself out of the chair as fast as she could, and halfran and half-staggered forward a few steps.
Harry held out his arms—
—and Hermione half-jumped half-fell into Professor McGonagall’s
arms, beginning to sob hysterically.
Hmpfh, said a voice inside Harry. I kind of thought we’d earned that
one ourselves.
Oh, shut up.
Professor McGonagall was holding Hermione so ﬁrmly that you
might have thought it was a mother holding her daughter, or maybe
granddaughter. After a few moments Hermione’s sobs slowed, and then
stopped. Professor McGonagall suddenly shifted her stance and grabbed
onto her more tightly; the girl’s hands were dangling limply, now, and
her eyes were closed—
“She’ll be ﬁne, Mr. Potter,” Professor McGonagall said softly in
Harry’s direction, without looking at him. “She just needs a few hours
*

1371 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-ONE

*
*

*

in one of Madam Pomfrey’s beds.”
“All right, then,” Harry said. “Let’s get her to Madam Pomfrey’s.”
“Yes,” said Dumbledore, as he descended to the bottom of the dark
stone stairs. “Let us all go home, indeed.” His blue eyes were locked on
Harry, as hard as sapphires.

**
*
The Lords and Ladies of the Wizengamot are departing their wooden
benches, leaving as they came, looking rather nervous.
The vast majority are thinking ‘The Dementor was frightened of the
Boy-Who-Lived!’
Some of the shrewder ones are already wondering how this will affect the delicate power balance of the Wizengamot—if a new piece has
appeared upon the gameboard.
Almost none are thinking anything along the lines of ‘I wonder how
he did that.’
This is the truth of the Wizengamot: Many are nobles, many are
wealthy magnates of business, a few came by their status in other ways.
Some of them are stupid. Most are shrewd in the realms of business
and politics, but their shrewdness is circumscribed. Almost none have
walked the path of a powerful wizard. They have not read through ancient books, scrutinized old scrolls, searching for truths too powerful
to walk openly and disguised in conundrums, hunting for true magic
among a hundred fantastic fairy tales. When they are not looking at a
contract of debt, they abandon what shrewdness they possess and relax
with some comfortable nonsense. They believe in the Deathly Hallows,
but they also believe that Merlin fought the dread Totoro and imprisoned
the Ree. They know (because that too is part of the standard legend) that
a powerful wizard must learn to distinguish the truth among a hundred
plausible lies. But it has not occurred to them that they might do the
same.
(Why not? Why, indeed, would wizards with enough status and
wealth to turn their hands to almost any endeavor, choose to spend their
*

1372 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS III

*
*

*

lives ﬁghting over lucrative monopolies on ink importation? The Headmaster of Hogwarts would hardly see the question; of course most people should not be powerful wizards, just as most people should not be
heroes. The Defense Professor could explain at great and cynical length
why their ambitions are so trivial; to him, too, there is no puzzle. Only
Harry Potter, for all the books he has read, is unable to understand; to
the Boy-Who-Lived the life choices of the Lords and Ladies seem incomprehensible—not what a good person would do, nor yet an evil person
either. Now which of the three is most wise?)
For whatever reason, then, most of the Wizengamot has never
walked the path that leads to powerful wizardry; they do not seek out
what is hidden. For them, there is no why. There is no explanation.
There is no causality. The Boy-Who-Lived, who was already halfway
into the magisterium of legend, has now been promoted all the way
there; and it is a brute fact, simple and unexplained, that the Boy-WhoLived frightens Dementors. Ten years earlier they were told that a oneyear-old boy defeated the most terrible Dark Lord of their generation,
perhaps the most evil Dark Lord ever to live; and they just accepted that
too.
You are not meant to question that sort of thing (they know in some
unspoken way). If the most terrible Dark Lord in history, confronts an
innocent baby—why, how could he not be vanquished? The rhythm of
the play demands it. You are supposed to applaud, not stand up from
your seat in the audience and say ‘Why?’ It is just the story’s conceit,
that in the end the Dark Lord is brought down by a little child; and if
you are going to question that, you might as well not attend the play in
the ﬁrst place.
It does not occur to them to second-guess the application of such
reasoning to the events they have seen with their own eyes in the Most
Ancient Hall. Indeed, they are not consciously aware that they are using
story-reasoning on real life. As for scrutinizing the Boy-Who-Lived with
the same careful logic they would use on a political alliance or a business
arrangement—what brain would associate to that, when a part of the
legendary magisterium is at hand?
But there are a very few, seated on those wooden benches, who do
* 1373 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-ONE

*
*

*

not think like this.
There are a certain few of the Wizengamot who have read through
half-disintegrated scrolls and listened to tales of things that happened to
someone’s brother’s cousin, not for entertainment, but as part of a quest
for power and truth. They have already marked the Night of Godric’s
Hollow, as reported by Albus Dumbledore, as an anomalous and potentially important event. They have wondered why it happened, if it did
happen; or if not, why Dumbledore is lying.
And when an eleven-year-old boy rises up and says “Lucius Malfoy”
in that cold adult voice, and goes on to speak words one simply would
not expect to hear from a ﬁrst-year in Hogwarts, they do not allow the
fact to slip into the lawless blurs of legends and the premises of plays.
They mark it as a clue.
They add it to the list.
This list is beginning to look somewhat alarming.
It doesn’t particularly help when the boy yells “BOO!” at a Dementor and the decaying corpse presses itself ﬂat against the opposite wall
and its horrible ear-hurting voice rasps, “Make him go away.”

*

1374 *

CHAPTER

EIGHT Y-TWO

TABOO TRADEOFFS, FINAL
hoenix travel was a sensation entirely unlike Apparition or
portkeys. You caught on ﬁre—you deﬁnitely felt yourself catching
on ﬁre, even though there was no pain—and instead of burning to ashes,
the ﬁre burned all the way through you and you became ﬁre, and then
you went out in one place and blazed up in another. It didn’t sicken
the stomach like portkeys or Apparition, but it was a rather unnerving
experience nonetheless. If the underlying truth of phoenix travel really
was becoming a speciﬁc instantiation of a more general Fire, then that
seemed to hint you could potentially burn anywhere—even in the distant
past, or in another universe, or in two places at once. You might go out
in one place and blaze up in a hundred others, and the you who arrived
at Hogwarts would never know the diﬀerence. Though Harry had read
what he could about phoenixes, trying to ﬁgure out how to get one of his
own, and there’d been no hint of anything remotely like that capability.
Harry caught ﬁre and went out and blazed up somewhere else; and
just like that he, and the Headmaster, and the unconscious form of Hermione Granger held in the Headmaster’s arms, were occupying another
place; with Fawkes above them all. A calm, warm room of bright stone
columns, skylit on all four sides, populated by white beds in long rows,
four of which had silencing veils drawn around them, and the rest empty.
In one corner of Harry’s vision, a surprised-looking Madam Pomfrey
was turning toward them. Dumbledore seemed to pay the senior healer
no heed, as he carefully laid down Hermione on an unoccupied white
bed.

P

*

1375 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-TWO

*
*

*

From a distant corner there was a ﬂash of green, and from out of a
ﬁreplace strode Professor McGonagall, brushing herself oﬀ slightly from
the Floo ashes.
The old wizard turned from the bed and reached one of his arms
around Harry again; and then the Boy-Who-Lived and his wizard vanished in another burst of ﬁre.

**
*
When Harry had fully lit up again he was standing in the Headmaster’s
oﬃce, amid the noises of a dozen dozen inexplicable gidgets.
The young boy took a step away from the old wizard and then turned
on him, emerald and sapphire eyes meeting.
The two of them did not speak for a time, looking at each other; as
though all they had to speak could be said only by stares, and not said
in any other way.
In time the boy enunciated words slowly and precisely.
“I cannot believe that a phoenix is still upon your shoulder.”
“The phoenix chooses but once,” said the old wizard. “They might
perhaps leave a master who chooses evil over good; they will not leave a
master forced to choose between one good and another. Phoenixes are
not arrogant. They know the limits of their own wisdom.” Stern indeed,
that ancient gaze. “Unlike you, Harry.”
“Choose between one good and another,” Harry echoed ﬂatly. “Like
Hermione Granger’s life, versus a hundred thousand Galleons.” The rage
and indignation Harry wanted to put into his voice wasn’t quite there,
for some reason, maybe because—
“You are hardly in a position to speak to me of that, Harry Potter.”
The Headmaster’s voice was deceptively soft. “Or what was that look of
reluctance that I saw upon your face, there in the Most Ancient Hall?”
The sense of inward hollowness grew worse. “I was looking for other
alternatives,” Harry bit out. “Some way to save her that didn’t lose the
money.”
*

1376 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS, FINAL

*
*

*

Wow, said Ravenclaw. You just told an outright lie. Not only that, I
think you actually believed it for the seconds it took to say it. That’s kinda
scary.
“Is that what you were thinking, Harry?” The blue eyes were keen,
and there was a terrifying moment when Harry wondered if the world’s
most powerful wizard could see right past his Occlumency barriers.
“Yes,” Harry said, “I ﬂinched away from the pain of losing all the
money in my vault. But I did it! That’s what counts! And you—” The
indignation that had faltered out of Harry’s voice returned. “You actually put a price on Hermione Granger’s life, and you put it below a
hundred thousand Galleons!”
“Oh?” the old wizard said softly. “And what price do you put on her
life, then? A million Galleons?”
“Are you familiar with the economic concept of ‘replacement
value’?” The words were spilling from Harry’s lips almost faster than he
could consider them. “Hermione’s replacement value is inﬁnite! There’s
nowhere I can go to buy another one!”
Now you’re just talking mathematical nonsense, said Slytherin. Ravenclaw, back me up here?
“Is Minerva’s life also of inﬁnite worth?” the old wizard said harshly.
“Would you sacriﬁce Minerva to save Hermione?”
“Yes and yes,” Harry snapped. “That’s part of Professor McGonagall’s job and she knows it.”
“Then Minerva’s value is not inﬁnite,” said the old wizard, “for all
that she is loved. There can only be one king upon a chessboard, Harry
Potter, only one piece that you will sacriﬁce any other piece to save. And
Hermione Granger is not that piece. Make no mistake, Harry Potter,
this day you may well have lost your war.”
And if the old wizard’s words hadn’t hit quite so hard, and quite so
close to home, Harry might not have said what he said then.
“Lucius was right,” Harry ground out. “You never had a wife, you
never had a daughter, you’ve never had anything but war—”
The old wizard’s left hand closed hard upon Harry’s wrist, bony
ﬁngers digging into the still-developing muscle of Harry’s arm, and for
a moment Harry was paralyzed with the shock of it, he had forgotten
* 1377 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-TWO

*
*

*

what it meant that adults were stronger.
Albus Dumbledore did not seem to notice. He only turned, dragging
Harry with him, and moved forward in hard steps toward the wall of the
room.
“Phoenix’s price.”
Harry was pulled up along the black stairs.
“Phoenix’s fate.”
The room of black pedestals, silver light falling on shattered wands.
“You think,” yelled Harry, after his lips unlocked, “that you can win
any argument, just by standing here?”
The old wizard ignored him, dragging Harry across the room. His
right hand, no longer holding his wand, grabbed up a vial of silver ﬂuid—
Harry blinked in shock; the vial of silver ﬂuid had been standing next
to a picture of Dumbledore, or so it had appeared to Harry in the brief
moment before he was dragged past.
Past the end of all the pedestals, at the farthest part of the room, rose
a great stone basin with runes carved into it that Harry didn’t recognize.
The center was a shallow depression ﬁlled with transparent liquid, and
into this the old wizard dumped the canister of silver ﬂuid, which at once
began to spread out, to swirl, to set the entire basin glowing eerie white.
The old wizard’s hand let go of Harry’s arm and gestured to the
glowing basin, commanding harshly, “Look!”
As requested, Harry stared at the glowing water.
“Put your head into the Pensieve, Harry Potter.” The old wizard’s
voice was stern.
Harry had heard that word before, but he couldn’t remember where.
“What—does this do—”
“Memories,” the old wizard said. “You will see my memory. My
oath that it is safe. Now look into the Pensieve, Ravenclaw, if you still
care anything at all for your precious truth!”
That was a request that Harry could not deny, and he stepped forward and thrust his head into the glowing water.

**
*
* 1378 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS, FINAL

*
*

*

Harry was sitting behind the desk in the Headmaster’s oﬃce of Hogwarts,
and his wrinkled hands that clutched at his head were spotted with age and
white hairs.
“He is all that I have!” wept a voice, very strange was Dumbledore’s voice
as Dumbledore himself remembered it, from the inside it seemed far less stern
and wise. “The last of my family! All that I have left!”
No emotion had been allowed to pass through the Pensieve, only the physical sensation of seeming to speak the words. Harry heard the utter desolation
in Dumbledore’s words, the sounds that seemed to come from Harry’s own
throat, but Harry did not feel it beyond the hearing.
“You’ve got no choice,” said a harsh voice.
The eyes moved, the ﬁeld of vision jumped to a man that Harry didn’t
recognize, in clothing tinged with Auror crimson but made of solid leather
with many pockets.
His right eye was overlarge, with an electric-blue pupil that constantly
darted and moved.
“You cannot ask this of me, Alastor!” Dumbledore’s voice was wild. “Not
this! Anything but this!”
“I’m not asking,” growled the man. “Voldie’s the one who’s asking, and
you’re going to tell him no.”
“For money, Alastor?” Dumbledore’s voice was begging. “Only for
money?”
“You ransom Aberforth, you lose the war,” the man said sharply. “That
simple. One hundred thousand Galleons is nearly all we’ve got in the warchest, and if you use it like this, it won’t be reﬁlled. What’ll you do, try to
convince the Potters to empty their vault like the Longbottoms already did?
Voldie’s just going to kidnap someone else and make another demand. Alice,
Minerva, anyone you care about, they’ll all be targets if you pay oﬀ the Death
Eaters. That’s not the lesson you should be trying to teach them.”
“If I do this I will have no one. No one.” Dumbledore’s voice broke, the
world tilted as the outlooking head fell down into the ancient hands, and
awful sounds came from not-Harry’s throat as he began to sob like a child.
“Shall I tell Voldie’s messenger no?” said Alastor’s voice, now strangely
gentle. “You don’t have to do it yourself, old friend.”
“No—I will say it myself—I must—”
* 1379 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-TWO

*
*

*

**
*
The memory ended with a shock and Harry ripped his head out of the
glowing water, gasping as though he’d been deprived of air.
The transition between scenes, between decade-old reality and
present moment, was another jolt to Harry’s mind; in some fashion
his immersion in the past had unanchored him. The broken old man
sobbing in his oﬃce had been another person in another era, Harry had
understood that much; someone softer—
Before it had all vanished like dissipating smoke, returning the now,
the present day.
Terrible and stern stood the ancient wizard, like he was carven from
stone; beard woven of thread like iron, half-moon glasses like mirrors,
and the pupils behind as sharp and unyielding as black diamond.
“Do you also wish to see my brother as he died under the Cruciatus?”
said Albus Dumbledore. “Voldemort sent me that memory as well!”
“And that—” Harry was having trouble producing a voice, for the
growing sickness in his chest. “That was when—” The words seemed to
burn in his throat, as the awful knowledge dawned on him, the horrible
understanding. “That was when you burned Narcissa Malfoy alive in
her own bedroom.”
Albus Dumbledore’s gaze was cold as he answered. “To that question
only a fool would say yea or nay. What matters is that the Death Eaters
believe I killed her, and that belief kept safe the families of all who served
the Order of the Phoenix—until this day. Now do you understand what
you have done? What you have done to your friends, Harry Potter, and
to any that stand with you?” The old wizard seemed to grow still taller
and more terrible, as his voice rose louder. “You have made them all
targets, and targets they will remain! Until you prove, the only way it
can be proven, that you are no longer willing to pay such prices!”
“And is it true?” Harry said. There was a buzzing sensation ﬁlling
him, his body growing more distant. “What Draco said, that Narcissa
Malfoy never got her hands dirty, that she was only Lucius’s wife? She
* 1380 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS, FINAL

*
*

*

was an enabler, I get that, but I can’t back that deserving being burned
alive.”
“Nothing less would have convinced them that I was done with hesitation.” The old wizard’s voice brooked no question and no refusal.
“Always I was too reluctant to do as I must, always it was others who
paid the cost of my mercy. So Alastor told me from the beginning, but I
did not listen to him. You, I expect, shall prove better at such decisions
than I.”
“I’m surprised,” Harry said, amazed that his voice was almost steady.
“I would have expected the Death Eaters to go after another Light family
and start a cycle of escalating retaliation, if you didn’t get them all with
your ﬁrst strike.”
“If my opponent had been Lucius, perhaps.” Dumbledore’s eyes were
like stones. “I am told that Voldemort laughed at the news, and proclaimed to his Death Eaters that I had ﬁnally grown, and was at last a
worthy opponent. Perhaps he was right. After the day I condemned my
brother to his death, I began to weigh those who followed me, balancing
them one against another, asking who I would risk, and who I would
sacriﬁce, to what end. It was strange how many fewer pieces I lost, once
I knew what they were worth.”
Harry’s jaw seemed locked, like it took a massive eﬀort to make his
lips move. “But then it’s not like Lucius was deliberately taking Hermione for ransom,” Harry’s voice said thinly. “From Lucius’s perspective,
someone else broke the truce ﬁrst. So with that in mind, how many
Galleons was Hermione worth, exactly? Leaving aside the Danegeld
thing, if it was just some ordinary threat to her life, how much should I
have paid to save her? Ten thousand Galleons? Five thousand?”
The old wizard did not answer.
“It’s a funny thing,” Harry said, his voice wavering like something
seen through underwater. “Do you know, the day I went in front of the
Dementor, what my worst memory was? It was my parents dying. I
heard their voices and everything.”
The old wizard’s eyes widened behind the half-moon glasses.
“And here’s the thing,” Harry said, “here’s the thing I’ve been thinking about over and over. The Dark Lord gave Lily Potter the chance to
*

1381 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-TWO

*
*

*

walk away. He said that she could ﬂee. He told her that dying in front of
the crib wouldn’t save her baby. ‘Step aside, foolish woman, if you have
any sense in you at all—’” An awful chill came over Harry as he spoke
those words from his own lips, but he shook it oﬀ and continued. “And
afterward I kept thinking, I couldn’t seem to stop myself from thinking,
wasn’t the Dark Lord right? If only Mother had stepped away. She tried
to curse the Dark Lord but it was suicide, she had to have known that it
was suicide. Her choice wasn’t between her life and mine, her choice was
for herself to live or for both of us to die! If she’d only done the logical
thing and walked away, I mean, I love Mum too, but Lily Potter would
be alive right now and she would be my mother!” Tears were blurring
Harry’s eyes. “Only now I understand, I know what Mother must have
felt. She couldn’t step aside from the crib. She couldn’t! Love doesn’t
walk away!”
It was like the old wizard had been struck, struck by a chisel that
shattered him straight down the middle.
“What have I said?” the old wizard whispered. “What have I said to
you?”
“I don’t know!” shouted Harry. “I wasn’t listening either!”
“I—I’m sorry, Harry—I—” The old wizard pressed his hands to his
face, and Harry saw that Albus Dumbledore was weeping. “I should
not have said, such things to you—I should not, have resented, your innocence—”
Harry stared at the wizard for another second, and then Harry
turned and marched out of the black room, down the stairs, through
the oﬃce—
“I really don’t know why you’re still on his shoulder,” Harry said to
Fawkes.
—out the oaken door and into the endlessly turning spiral.

**
*
Harry had arrived in the Transﬁguration classroom before anyone else,
before even Professor McGonagall. There was Charms class earlier, for
* 1382 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS, FINAL

*
*

*

his year, but that he hadn’t even bothered trying to attend. Whether
Professor McGonagall would make today’s class he didn’t know. There
was something ominous about all the empty desks beside him, the absence at the board. As if he stood alone in Hogwarts, with all his friends
departed.
According to the class schedule, today’s lesson was on sustained
Transﬁgurations, all the rules of which Harry had learned by heart back
when he was Transﬁguring a huge rock into the small diamond that
shone on his pinky ﬁnger. It would be a theoretical subject, rather than
practical, for the rest of the class; which was a pity, because he could
have used a dose of Transﬁguration’s trance.
Harry noted distantly that his hand was trembling, to the point
where he had trouble undoing the pouch’s drawstring as he drew forth
the Transﬁguration textbook.
You were monstrously unfair to Dumbledore, said the voice Harry had
been calling Slytherin, only now it also seemed to be the Voice of Economic Sensibility and maybe also Conscience.
Harry’s eyes dropped down to his textbook, but the section was so
familiar it might as well have been a blank parchment.
Dumbledore fought a war against a Dark Lord who deliberately set out
to break him in the cruelest possible way. He had to choose between losing
his war and his brother. Albus Dumbledore knows, he learned in the worst
possible way, that there are limits to the value of one life; and it almost broke
his sanity to admit it. But you, Harry Potter—you already knew better.
“Shut up,” the boy whispered to the empty Transﬁguration classroom, though there was nobody there to hear it.
You’d already read about Philip Tetlock’s experiments on people asked to
trade oﬀ a sacred value against a secular one, like a hospital administrator
who has to choose between spending a million dollars on a kidney to save a
ﬁve-year-old, and spending the million dollars to buy other hospital equipment or pay physician salaries. And the subjects in the experiment became
indignant and wanted to punish the hospital administrator for even thinking about the choice. Do you remember reading about that, Harry Potter?
Do you remember thinking how very stupid that was, since if hospital equipment and doctor salaries didn’t also save lives, there would be no point in
* 1383 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-TWO

*
*

*

having hospitals or doctors? Should the hospital administrator have paid a
billion pounds for that liver, even if it meant the hospital going bankrupt
the next day?
“Shut up!” the boy whispered.
Every time you spend money in order to save a life with some probability,
you establish a lower bound on the monetary value of a life. Every time you
refuse to spend money to save a life with some probability, you establish an
upper bound on the monetary value of life. If your upper bounds and lower
bounds are inconsistent, it means you could move money from one place
to another, and save more lives at the same cost. So if you want to use a
bounded amount of money to save as many lives as possible, your choices
must be consistent with some monetary value assigned to a human life; if
not then you could reshuﬄe the same money and do better. How very sad,
how very hollow the indignation, of those who refuse to say that money and
life can ever be compared, when all they’re doing is forbidding the strategy
that saves the most people, for the sake of pretentious moral grandstanding...
Harry’s head dropped into his hands.
You knew that, and you still said what you did to Dumbledore.
You deliberately tried to hurt Dumbledore’s feelings.
He’s never tried to hurt you, Harry Potter, not once.
Harry’s head dropped into his hands.
Why had Harry said what he’d said, to a sad old ancient wizard
who’d fought hard and endured more than anyone should ever have to
endure? Even if the old wizard was wrong, did he deserve to be hurt for
it, after all that had happened to him? Why was there a part of him that
seemed to get angry at the old wizard beyond reason, lashing out at him
harder than Harry had ever hit anyone, without thought of moderation
once the rage had been raised, only to quiet as soon as Harry left his
presence?
Is it because you know Dumbledore won’t ﬁght back? That no matter
what you say to him, however unfair, he’ll never use his own power against
you, he’ll never treat you the way you treat him? Is this the way you treat
people when you know they won’t hit back? James Potter’s bullying genes,
manifesting at last?
Harry closed his eyes.
* 1384 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS, FINAL

*
*

*

Like the Sorting Hat speaking inside his head—
What is the real reason for your anger?
What do you fear?
A whirlwind of images seemed to ﬂash through Harry’s mind, then,
the past Dumbledore weeping into his hands; the present form of the old
wizard, standing tall and terrible; a vision of Hermione screaming in her
chains, in the metal chair, as Harry abandoned her to the Dementors;
and an imagination of a woman with long white hair (had she looked
like her husband?) falling amid the ﬂames of her bedroom, as a wand
was held upon her and orange light reﬂected from half-moon glasses.
Albus Dumbledore had seemed to think that Harry would be better
at that sort of thing than him.
And Harry knew that he probably would be. He knew the math,
after all.
But it was understood, somehow it was understood, that utilitarian
ethicists didn’t actually rob banks so they could give the money to the
poor. The end result of throwing away all ethical constraint wouldn’t
actually be sunshine and roses and happiness for all. The prescription of
consequentialism was to take the action that led to the best net consequences, not actions that had one positive consequence and wrecked everything else along the way. Expected utility maximizers were allowed
to take common sense into account, when they were calculating their
expectations.
Somehow Harry had understood that, even before anyone else had
warned him he’d understood. Before he’d read about Vladimir Lenin or
the history of the French Revolution, he’d known. It might have been
his earliest science ﬁction books warning him about people with good
intentions, or maybe Harry had just seen the logic for himself. Somehow
he’d known from the very beginning, that if he stepped outside his ethics
whenever there was a reason, the end result wouldn’t be good.
A ﬁnal image came to him, then: Lily Potter standing in front of her
baby’s crib and measuring the intervals between outcomes: the ﬁnal outcome if she stayed and tried to curse her enemy (dead Lily, dead Harry),
the ﬁnal outcome if she walked away (live Lily, dead Harry), weighing
the expected utilities, and making the only sensible choice.
* 1385 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-TWO

*
*

*

She would’ve been Harry’s mother if she had.
“But human beings can’t live like that,” the boy’s lips whispered to
the empty classroom. “Human beings can’t live like that.”

* 1386 *

CHAPTER

EIGHT Y-THREE

TABOO TRADEOFFS,
AFTERMATH I
hen Padma entered the Transﬁguration classroom, she saw that
half the class had beaten her there, a strange, deathly silence
pervading the room. Harry Potter sat alone in one corner, staring oﬀ
into some unknown distance, his eyes half-lidded, nearly closed.
Rumor said that the Aurors had discovered that the Defense Professor had Polyjuiced as Granger to fool Malfoy.
Rumor said that Hermione had been bound by the Unbreakable Vow
to be Draco Malfoy’s slave.
Rumor said that Hermione had gotten the Dementor’s Kiss.
But if that were true, Harry Potter wouldn’t be sitting there, he
would be—
Padma didn’t know what General Potter would do. Her mind went
blank, trying to think about it.
Even when Professor McGonagall got there, the silence hadn’t broken. The Transﬁguration Professor walked up to the board without a
pause, erased it with a sweep of her hand, and then began to write.
“Today, children,” began the calm professional voice of the Transﬁguration Professor, just as though nothing out of the ordinary had happened that week, “we shall learn how much eﬀort it takes to sustain a
Transﬁguration, and why, at your age, you should not even try. The
original Form is not gone, only suppressed; and to maintain that suppression—”

W

* 1387 *

**
*

CHAPTER EIGHT Y-THREE

*
*

*

“Excuse me,” said Padma Patil. She knew her voice was shaking, she
knew that she was trembling visibly, but she had to ask. “Excuse me,
Professor, what happened with Miss Granger?”
The Transﬁguration Professor paused at the board, and turned to
look at Padma. The Professor should have looked stern, having been
interrupted without a hand being raised, but instead her face was kindly.
“You don’t already know, Miss Patil? I expected that rumor would have
spread.”
“There’s too many rumors,” said Padma. “I don’t know what’s true.”
Morag MacDougal raised her hand, then said without waiting to be
called, “I told you, Padma, what’s true is that the Wizengamot found
Granger guilty and ordered her to get the Dementor’s Kiss and they
brought in the Dementor and Harry Potter glued it to the ceiling and
wouldn’t let it down until—”
“Oh, dear Merlin,” said Professor McGonagall, her expression growing sharp, but then she visibly calmed herself. “The aﬀair was utterly
ridiculous and I shan’t go into detail. Let it stand that Miss Granger is
resting with Madam Pomfrey for now, and coming back to classes tomorrow. And if I catch anyone bothering her, I shall turn them into
glass vases and drop them.”
The entire class gasped at this; it wasn’t so much that the threat was
fatal, as that it broke the safety rules for Transﬁguration.
Professor McGonagall turned back to her board—
From a corner of the classroom, another voice rose up. “What about
Professor Quirrell?” said Terry Boot. “Has he been arrested?”
“The Aurors are only detaining him,” said the Transﬁguration Professor without turning around. “If they have not given back our Defense Professor by tomorrow, I shall ask the Headmaster to go fetch
him. Though I may as well tell you now that the Board of Governors
has scheduled a vote on whether Professor Quirrell’s battles shall be allowed to continue.”
Kevin Entwhistle spoke. “And General Malfoy? When’s he getting
back from St. Mungo’s?”
The Transﬁguration Professor paused in her drawing.
She turned around again, more slowly, this time.
* 1388 *

**
*

TABOO TRADEOFFS, AFTERMATH I

*
*

*

“I am sorry, Mr. Entwhistle,” said Professor McGonagall. Her
face looked a little more lined than when she had entered the room.
“Mr. Malfoy’s health is in no danger, I am given to understand. Unfortunately, I have received an owl from Mr. Malfoy’s father withdrawing
him from Hogwarts. I am afraid he is not coming back.”

* 1389 *

This book was edited by a fan of the story.
The text was set in 12-point URW Garamond No. 8. Chapter headings were set in
Lumos, inspired by the display font used in
the US editions of the Harry Potter books,
drawn by Sarah McFalls. The book was
A
typeset using LTEX. The artwork for the
cover was created with the GIMP.

