for the time being in his absolute discretion.
One may almost doubt if the wisest man has learned anything of absolute value by living.
Then the decree _nisi_ and the King's proctor tries to show cause why and, he failing to quash it, _nisi_ was made absolute.
It indicates better than any water hereabouts the absolute progress of the season, being least affected by transient changes of temperature.
It is not so important that many should be as good as you, as that there be some absolute goodness somewhere; for that will leaven the whole lump.
The progress from an absolute to a limited monarchy, from a limited monarchy to a democracy, is a progress toward a true respect for the individual.
The cold of interstellar space, thousands of degrees below freezing point or the absolute zero of Fahrenheit, Centigrade or Reaumur: the incipient intimations of proximate dawn.
When we are unhurried and wise, we perceive that only great and worthy things have any permanent and absolute existence, that petty fears and petty pleasures are but the shadow of the reality.
• These common math symbols may be used:x < y (x is less than y)x‫ ס‬y (x is not equal to y)(the nonnegative square root of x,where x ≥ 0)|x|(the absolute value of x, where x is areal number)n!
These cellar dents, like deserted fox burrows, old holes, are all that is left where once were the stir and bustle of human life, and "fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute," in some form and dialect or other were by turns discussed.
ArithmeticQuestions may involve arithmetic operations, powers,operations on radical expressions, estimation, percent, absolute value, properties of integers (e.g.,divisibility, factoring, prime numbers, odd and evenintegers), and the number line.
• Arithmetic topics include properties and typesof integers, such as divisibility, factorization,prime numbers, remainders, and odd and evenintegers; arithmetic operations, exponents, androots; and concepts such as estimation, percent,ratio, rate, absolute value, the number line, decimal representation and sequences of numbers.
You will be laced with cruel force into vicelike corsets of soft dove coutille with whalebone busk to the diamondtrimmed pelvis, the absolute outside edge, while your figure, plumper than when at large, will be restrained in nettight frocks, pretty two ounce petticoats and fringes and things stamped, of course, with my houseflag, creations of lovely lingerie for Alice and nice scent for Alice.
800 pounds plus 2 1/2 % interest on the same, repayable quarterly in equal annual instalments until extinction by amortisation of loan advanced for purchase within a period of 20 years, amounting to an annual rental of 64 pounds, headrent included, the titledeeds to remain in possession of the lender or lenders with a saving clause envisaging forced sale, foreclosure and mutual compensation in the event of protracted failure to pay the terms assigned, otherwise the messuage to become the absolute property of the tenant occupier upon expiry of the period of years stipulated.