http://ssrn.com/abstract=1451429.
Art is always more abstract than we fancy.
We have lost the abstract sense of beauty.
We begin with the most abstract, and proceed from the abstract to the concrete.
There seemed to be few, if any, abstract terms, or little use of figurative language.
But the abstract is a vacant form to us until brought into relation with man and nature.
The more abstract the truth you wish to teach, the more must you allure the senses to it.
He would probably have regarded any abstract truth of number or figure as higher than the greatest of them.
This definition is abstract and broad, encompassing all possible computable reward functions and environments.
AIXI (Hutter 2005) is an abstract and non-anthropomorphic formalism for general and flexible superintelligence.
He too will frame an ideal, but his ideal comprehends not only abstract justice, but the whole relations of man.
We hardly appreciate the power which the idea of the State, like all other abstract ideas, exercised over the mind of Plato.
Neither of the Greek words by which it is described are so purely abstract as the English word 'space' or the Latin 'spatium.'
The government obviously is guided by abstract considerations, and remains indifferent to the influence its measures may exercise.
In our own age even Utopias affect the spirit of legislation, and an abstract idea may exercise a great influence on practical politics.
It should not be by their architecture, but why not even by their power of abstract thought, that nations should seek to commemorate themselves?
The former was a sort of cyclopaedia to him, which he supposed to contain an abstract of human knowledge, as indeed it does to a considerable extent.
“Oh, Merlin,” whispered the witch, “Merlin, Merlin, Merlin...” She appears concerned, thought an abstract, distant thing between two panes of glass.
Since we are concerned not with agents in the abstract, but with very powerful agents in the real world, we introduce the concept of an agent implementation.
For Plato is the prophet who 'came into the world to convince men'--first of the fallibility of sense and opinion, and secondly of the reality of abstract ideas.